Call the meeting to order.
Thank you'll have the superintendent take the role.
DeAngelo here, Dowling here.
I'm sorry, time. Cut it.
Of put my glasses on and I'll see this it's
very small.
It is very small.
Okay, there we go.
Feller here. Holman here. Richardson here. Rich.
Smith here. Kabisa
Kabisa Davison.
Thank you as this is a public proceeding.
Unless the board of education specifically votes.
Votes to enter into executive session.
The public has the right to hear everything and to
look at all exhibits.
Exhibits, please let us know if you experience difficulties with
accessibility.
Members of the district staff are located in the lecture
hall to assist you.
The school board works from a prepared agenda.
Which is posted in advance.
On the district website and printed copies of this evening's
agenda.
Are available near the entrance of the lecture hall.
Just for fellow board members to be reminded that Robert's
rules states, the members may speak no more than twice
on the same question.
At any one meeting except by permission of the board
chair.
Questions brief suggestions or points of clarification are not counted.
At, in debate as speaking in debate.
The board asked the public audience to refrain from clapping
or booing.
Side comments or other behaviors that could interrupt.
The flow of speakers, every person is entitled to speak
their opinion and to feel safe in the process.
There is just other people know there is childcare that's
available.
In the learning commons.
Commons. And if anyone is in need of interpreter services,
if they come up to the front to see Andy
Wallace here, raise your hand, Andy. So people can see
where you are. Andy will help to make that
happen. Oh, and April Will's April. Okay. And there's April.
So you can come to them.
So I'll just say in beginning, I know this has
been hard and I believe everyone in this room.
Is trying to do their very best. And I know
we'll all keep trying. I wanna begin by thanking two
of my colleagues, members, Richardson, and Holman.
For highlighting the challenges of the past two weeks.
They spoke to the loss of jobs and pending school
closure.
And I apologize for not speaking to those hardships, as
I know they are significant.
So my appreciation to both of them.
There have been questions about a city council meeting that
was previously scheduled for today. And I want to read
a statement that I received from mayor Tipton.
Which goes as follows and I quote.
During this time of unprecedented.
Budgeting challenges for Southport schools holding a special council meeting.
To discuss the city's options for potentially aiding.
The school budget seemed irresponsible. Action.
Last Thursday, I scheduled that meeting to take place for
earlier today.
Hours later, however, I canceled the meeting.
It was not a meeting requested by the school board
and its timing could have been disruptive to the budgeting
process underway.
Passing a school board budget is the responsibility of the
school board.
And I deeply respect your hard work. I apologize for
causing any confusion. Thank you, mayor Tipton end quote.
I would just say in an effort to clarify.
My position is only mine alone.
So I hold no unilateral authority.
As this board works as a full body, not as
individuals. So I'm entitled to my opinion as is everyone
up here, but I don't hold any power to.
Wield any decisions. So
thank you regarding how the process will work tonight.
And some questions that have arisen is next.
First we'll begin with a brief update by the superintendent's
leadership team.
And this will include answering some remaining questions.
Questions and outlining the plan for how we will transition.
Regardless of what the board decides.
Decides either way there will be change and the district
wants the public to know it is prepared for that
change.
Not all points will be answered tonight.
But the hope is to provide some understanding of how
we will move forward.
After that we will go to where we were at
the end of the last meeting.
We were not able to get back to board positions.
So we'll start there.
And then we will go to public comment.
We have spent several hours on public comment so far.
So I would just ask if people would focus on
any new thoughts or ideas you may have.
From there we'll answer any questions that we're able to
at this time.
And then go to the motions on the agenda.
Do any board members have any questions about this process
specifically?
I'm sorry. Okay. You're all set.
Okay. And if none, we will begin.
So I'm gonna go to the.
Superintendent for introduction of the.
Budget updates and we'll stop. We'll start tonight with the.
Update that we have on the budget.
Good evening. I'm Joe Prince.
Good evening. I'm Johanna prince. I'm the assistant superintendent of
schools and we'll give a, a brief overview.
This evening. So again, as chair DeAngelis just shared, we
will provide the overview of the elementary transition planning.
And then some proposal changes and comments before the board
enters into discussion.
So first wanted to talk a little bit about the
roadmap.
For elementary transition planning.
We are not gonna go back through what was presented
last week. The slides for this evening are online on
the budget page.
And on slide.
Four here is linked the information from last week. If
anyone would like to remind themselves of that information.
There are no changes that we are proposing this evening
with the two.
Options the board had in front of them.
Rather, we wanted to speak a little bit about.
How we would move forward.
Once a decision was made.
However I did want to start.
With just grounding this conversation back into equitable outcomes for
students.
Students that is the work of our district.
What you are looking at here on the left hand
side.
Is fall 2024 data. This is from.
The NOIA, which is an assessment in math that is
taken K through four.
So fall 20, 24 on the left.
Fall 2025 on the right.
What you are looking at in those.
Five bars and a across the bottom in both of
those graphs, it's brown.
Then Dyer then Kahler.
Then skill and then small.
The green portion REM when students receive a score on
this.
Assessment. It is in
five different quintile bands for how they've performed.
What you are looking at here in green is the
percentage of students at each school.
Who scored at the
high or above average.
High average or above average.
Performance threshold while the red represents the percent of students
who were at low below or low average.
Scores what my hope here to illustrate for the board
and for the public.
Is that we have real.
Differences in academic achievements at our school.
In some cases.
As much as a 25% difference in the level of
achievement.
We have excellent educators across this district that are using
the same.
Curriculum in their classrooms.
Classrooms. However we have substantially different student populations.
And some of those students face.
Greater systemic barriers.
Barriers to accessing education.
All of our work here is.
About trying to improve outcomes for all students. I'm not
going to go through every piece of our academic data,
but rather wanted to sort of bring us back to
what has been guiding our team.
As we've made the recommendation that reconfiguration.
Will be best for all students.
Students, regardless of how quickly we accomplish that goal.
So
as we think about the domains of a transition.
To a, a, a new vision for elementary schools in
south Portland.
We know that that begins with our shared vision.
Ensuring that we hear family and community voices.
It must be grounded in what we know about student
learning and school experience.
And that's both ensuring that we are attending to the
academic programming.
And also the social, emotional considerations of any change that
might.
That the board may take action on.
We also know that there are a lot of questions
around transportation and daily logistics.
Logistics. And then also, how would staffing and school teams.
Be configured.
We also know that communication.
Is of the utmost importance in the transition.
That includes timelines and updates. It includes staff engagement and
then also family and community engagement.
So community engagement would begin with stakeholder meetings at each
school to allow for input. We believe that there should
be one for staff and one for families.
We also want to create opportunities.
For digital feedback through a, a survey.
And then we envision a committee, a committee, excuse me,
with representatives from all schools.
Ensuring that we'd have representation.
Of families, of multilingual students, our students with IEPs. And
then we would envision the board and administration would also
be.
Represented
it. So in terms of a process,
outline, we would like to move forward with a principal
moving onto special assignment.
During that time we would move forward with this proposal.
As quickly as possible.
We have asked principal, Karen who's currently the principal at
Caler school to step into this.
Role
regardless of how quickly the board is going to move.
On this transition, we know that we need someone.
Who has the sole focus of following this transition?
During that time.
That principal would, she would still remain connected to the
Kaler community.
And we would also be looking for interim coverage for
the day-to-day operations of the school that would be posted
internally.
And we would hope that that might be a, a
stepping stone for someone who is interested in moving into
administration to have an opportunity for the remainder of the
year to, to take on that leadership as well.
In addition, we know that there will need to be
teacher leadership.
On the instructional programming.
For students, and that is our academics. And certainly.
I would foresee us using our instructional leadership team, which
is two leaders from each grade level band.
Is along with multilingual and special education.
I also, we would want to engage with our school
counselors and social workers.
To be thinking about the social and emotional needs of
students.
Students. And then in particular teacher leadership around special programming.
We have a great deal of expertise in this district.
In our services for multilingual learners and also in special
education. And we would, we would want to bring those
voices to the table.
Additionally as part of the process.
There is essential work that would need to be done
with all of our association leaders.
Both as constituents in the process.
And also as
stakeholders in helping us.
To, to sort of give us feedback about how the
process is going.
The communication and what else is needed?
We can also update the transportation logistics. We are already
underway with a partner.
On this work, such that when the board makes a
decision.
We will be able to quickly move into operationalizing.
That based on whatever the parameters are.
Additionally, we have already sought quotes and are underway with
a potential vendor for moving logistics again.
Depending on the timeline and the option that the board
would consider.
Before I move on to the next slide.
I what I wanna share with the board and the
public.
Is that when we had to go through the.
The merger of Mahoney.
And Memorial middle schools.
We had a tremendous amount of work to accomplish.
And again, there was a longer.
Timeline in place there.
However we can benefit from the roadmap and we've already
begun that work. The elementary leadership team.
Has already begun transferring.
About those 80 different action items that we need to
undertake and we've started to internalize them for what does
it mean at the elementary level?
What's a reasonable timeline and sequencing out those pieces.
So again, we feel prepared to execute on either plan
that the board.
Should select
knowing that there's a lot of factors to weigh.
In, in prior conversations, there was a question about.
Civil rights considerations.
And we wanted to address.
That in fact, we
believe and know that the reason we are undertaking.
This model of potential reconfiguration.
Is because of our commitment to equitable outcomes.
Outcomes the consideration for
Taylor to be the closure.
Again, this is motivated by a financial constraint.
All schools were examined and our goal for the district
is equitable outcomes for all students.
Students what I have
here on the next slide for the board is a
slide that our internal stakeholders and teachers and staff have
seen.
This year, we have four district.
Goals around attendance.
Belonging achievement.
And equity and it's really that last goal that I
want to.
Call out. That's at the heart of some of the
work that we are doing.
We want to move the needle for all students, but
then we also know that that's not.
Enough, what that means is that each school this year
has their own.
Plan.
And is working on
not only moving the overall achievement of the student body.
But also attending to four specific subgroups.
Subgroups to work, to decrease the discrepancy between those groups.
And again, wanted to share this with the board, so
that, and the public so that they understood.
What this was
and again, we are looking to close that achievement gap
of identified subgroups by 5% in math and reading this
year.
Showing that graphically.
The green line in the center of this.
Represents the
math achievement students at or above the 41st percentile.
And we are seeing a positive, upward trend for all
students.
Students, however, the district should not yet be comfortable with
our achievement.
Because our white students represented by the line in blue.
Performed substantially above.
Our bipo students, the line in purple.
And that is happens across our subgroups. And it's our.
Responsibility to hold ourselves.
To to move the needle even further up.
On the, the subgroup growth while doing the overall.
So with that, I wanna move.
Into what is different about the proposal in front of
the board?
This evening.
And call the board and the public's attention to.
How this proposal has shifted.
With director and administrator.
Changes at the top of this, you can see three
different meetings. The 9th of March, the 23rd of March.
And this evening.
And the proposal in front of you.
This evening is the
reduction of the curriculum, instruction and assessment. That is what
CIA stands for.
And then the proposal of the reduction of the director
of D E I.
And the second assistant director of special education.
The proposal is to move two.
Instructional strategist positions.
Positions into the teacher's bargaining unit.
That would help to support that work, but be done
within that unit.
The building administrator proposal.
Has not changed since last week when we gathered.
So it is still the proposal for a reduction of
an elementary principal.
And that change of
moving from a middle school assistant principal of teaching and
learning to a pre-K through eight assistant principal of teaching
and learning.
What that means down at the bottom.
Is that there are
now three proposed new positions in the teacher's association.
The early childhood strategist we spoke about last week, the
D E I instructional strategist.
And then the addition of a special.
Education instructional strategist.
They're already were three of those roles in the budget.
Tonight's change adds a fourth role to that.
Again, we have heard
from stakeholders about staffing and administration.
And director roles and the value of instructional positions.
Structural positions. We have worked to evaluate our administrative systems.
To more clearly define the work of directors.
Directors. And we wanna ensure that we are using these
positions and ultimately funds efficiently and in the service of
students.
Students. And then I do want to highlight to the
board.
That director roles does help the district reduce.
Risk and the elimination of these positions could have negative
consequences.
Such as increased legal fees and out of district.
Costs, for example, as I consideration in the proposal.
So you have seen this chart at various stages of
the budget proposal.
It is now updated to reflect what is in this
evening's proposal.
So that we are moving from 13 to 10 director
roles.
Is the superintendent's budget.
You have also seen this.
Chart the two notable changes for this chart is that
the change in the teacher's association.
It previously showed 42 positions with the addition of the
two that we are recommending to be added in. It's
now a, a net change of 40 positions.
Positions. So 11% of their unit.
And then directors.
Directors moving from 13 to 10 positions is now 23%
of that unit.
Being impacted by this budget.
And a, a change that we, that the superintendent's budget
does not include.
Is that of the percussion ed tech.
The superintendent's budget.
Still recommends the elimination of that positions.
Positions. And we will note that all positions that are
planned for reduction in the FY 27 budget.
Play an important role and each have consi constituents, whether
or not they come to the microphone or send an
email.
So again, that position remains on the list to be
reduced in the superintendent's budget.
And I will remind the board and the public.
That in FY 26, the board voted to reinstate that
position with the anticipation of using reserve funds.
And to note, there was insufficient funding for all of
FY 26, and there's none available in that account for
FY 27.
There is a link to where that.
Action took place last spring, for those of you that
were not part of the process at that time.
We understand and also have wanted to look for additional
funding.
The reduction of 8.4 million in district costs.
Is enormous and
represents significant loss to our community.
We know that stakeholders have been exploring short-term local.
City funding and state funding measures as potential bridge.
Extensions in timelines.
And just would urge you as we consider FY 27
funding.
We have to be thoughtful about long-term planning for financial
sustainability.
The impact of short-term decisions now.
Will impact us in FY 28.
As well. And so again, just.
Being thoughtful about how, and if the board seeks additional
funds, whether that's from city council or from state.
Funding. And then again, just something that we have spoken
about before.
But that a sustainable path to rebuilding fund balance.
Is essential for us to consider. I think the board
is aware of that position.
Again, the, the two considerations that we put up here
as recommended policy considerations for the board are, are not
new.
But just urging us to think about creating a fun
balance.
Minimum threshold and a usage policy.
And that we could think about adopting a budget, timeline,
and strategy.
By November 1st or some agreeable date to the board each
year.
Such that the community would have a sense of what
to expect for the timelines to try and again,
make it, make sure information is shared as best as
possible.
So in summary.
The superintendent's budget.
Does allow us to support student learning and student outcomes.
Outcomes has been developed over the last four months.
Is focused on a path to fiscal.
Responsibility. And we have worked hard to incorporate feedback.
And criteria from stakeholders throughout the process.
And again, it represents the smallest year to year operating
increase in the last five years.
So as an overview.
With the changes that you.
That I spoke about earlier this evening, the bottom line
budget.
Is still the same bottom line budget that you saw.
Last week.
And you can see that it represents a 3.3.
Percent change in overall operating costs.
And a 6% changed.
For local tax revenue.
What that means. And our director of finance spoke about
this last week in terms of the proposed budget.
Tax impact. This is the same information she spoke to
last week. Just a reminder.
Here of what those changes are.
Keeping in mind that the school portion.
Of any tax increase is just one.
One piece of that puzzle.
And you can see here it's at 6%.
What that means is that for an average south Portland,
home value of 514,000.
That a taxpayer would see 257.
Dollars added.
As it relates to the school portion.
Of the tax increase that is not for the overall
tax increase.
And I, I think the board chair spoke about this
and you have in front of you.
Three potential decisions to be made this evening.
One regarding school closure.
One regarding action about reconfiguration.
Whether that's option a or.
Option B and then
consideration to adopt the superintendent's budget.
On slide 29 is just a detail of the letter
that would go to the commissioner.
Should the board move forward with school closure.
And then
wanting to share that we anticipate if the board does
not have three motions passed this evening, there would be
a board meeting this Thursday night to continue the work.
If this evening, the process does come to conclusion, then
the next.
Two steps in the budget process.
Would be a presentation to city council on April.
Seventh and then a workshop with city council.
On the 14th.
And that concludes.
Concludes our
our update for the board.
Thank you.
We are up to
comments by the board.
So we can start with questions. If people have any
questions about this and then we'll.
Come back around a second time to.
To comments before we go to public.
Comments member feller.
I'm sorry. I have eight questions about the budget.
And six questions about reconfiguration.
I'll start with the budget questions.
Hi, how we go? Hello? How are you doing?
First question. What's the status of the new state formula
for funding?
Do we know that and if we don't, when will
we know it? Oh, I, I don't know the status.
Okay.
Sorry.
At what month in the year do you think we're
gonna know about where our health insurance rates are coming
in? We're supposed to find out around April 10th. Okay. Give
or take. So, and we were expecting a 12% year
over year increase in the health insurance rates. It could
be eight to 14. Mm-hmm .
We've recently found out. So, so we get this letter
from them saying what the cap could possibly be.
And we just recently got word that the maximum it
could possibly be will actually be 11.5.
So I've already made that adjustment as part of the
rest of our adjustments.
So 11.5% is now the max.
I don't know where it will land, but I'm, I'm
just glad we've at least budgeted for what it is
so far. The budget that we're operating on now assumes
a 12% increase. Now it assumes that 11.5% increase. Okay,
great. Cuz that's the max max. Yep.
Maybe this is a question for you. Maybe it's a
question for somebody else. So I've heard a lot of
talk about bus drivers being asked to do additional work
when they're not driving a bus. So someone has said
to me,
they could be a lunch aid and some people have
said that they'll be doing custodial work. Can you speak
to that? And how many hours they might be doing
that a week? I'd probably I'd bring Mike up here
for that one.
Yeah.
Hi, good evening, Mike Natalie director of operations safety.
The plan that we put forward that I put forward.
Was we have
essentially the drivers are on the clock from seven to
4:00 PM.
On an average day, they are not, they're not driving
from nine 30 to one. O'clock one 30 thereabouts.
Thereabouts there's 20 drivers.
Potentially could be four elementary schools on a rotational basis.
It would look like one driver in each school.
Supporting lunchtime operations.
Excuse me. And to me, that looks like.
Setting up tables, wiping down tables in between lunch transitions
and picking up tables. It'd be capped at two hours.
And they'd be back in time for their PM runs.
And I apologize for being a bit ignorant about this.
Would they be getting paid between nine 30 and one
anyways? Correct.
Okay. Got it. Because when I, when we were saying.
Fewer lunch aids. They're making.
15 an hour, bud peppers making 30. Okay. To be
super clear. They're on that clock the whole time. Okay.
Very good. Maybe while you're up. Yep. Yep. Can I
just add one thing?
So anytime there is a change in working conditions, which
is what.
This proposal entails.
Entails, we have to engage in a meet and consult
process. We started that with the service employees association.
This morning to talk through what are their concerns and
what does this mean? So again, just wanted to make
sure the board understood.
That that obligation.
Remains this morning chair and vice chair de.
Angela chair, DeAngelis, vice chair, dabbling joined us in that
conversation cuz the board.
Also engages in that. Perfect.
While we're talking about transportation.
So cost of diesels going up a lot. We don't
know how long that's gonna persist.
What would a 50% increase, maybe even a 25% increase.
Just ballpark it for me, like.
The cost of diesel. How much would that be for
the district?
I I'd want a few minutes to work that
out. Okay.
But, but considerable. Okay.
A question about the new change that we've seen tonight
to the director role. What's the approximate cost savings. So
it's not a role being eliminated. It's being.
Releveled
do you mean between the assistant director of special education?
Yes.
It's about 20 to 30,000. It'll depend on where I'm
an S P T member comes in on their lanes
and steps.
Great.
Yeah, that's all I have on budget.
Other people wanna talk about budget. Thank you.
Other people, budget questions.
Questions. Yeah, go ahead.
No, you go, oh, no, I insist . Thanks.
I love going second.
Can you approximate for me? How many.
Roles. We are going to be.
Meeting and consulting over as a result of these cuts.
Well, I mean, all the bus drivers of some of
them will participate in custodial work in the middle of
their.
Duties there would certainly be some teachers. Ed techs.
Techs who else?
I mean, I, I think it's.
Gets significant, you know? Yeah. Yeah. They'll, they'll.
Yes, we there's a change in working conditions and we'll
have to.
Meet and consult and, and work it out.
Have we ever experienced?
This do we have, I'm not even gonna ask that
question.
How long do we think that those negotiations are going
to take, do they have to take place?
By, I mean, I assume they have to take place
by the beginning of the school year, but I know
that a lot of people aren't.
Aren't I, I'm not, I've never, I know teachers are,
I don't like, you know, we've got the summer, like,
how is that gonna work?
In terms of making sure that those.
Negotiations are taking place timely.
Sure they're already scheduled and starting. We started the service
today. I think teachers is tomorrow and ed texts Thursday,
if I'm remembering the calendar correctly.
So we're starting that process.
Now and
again, it's a collaborative.
Conversation. So I, I can't predict a timeline for that.
And the result let's say that those no negotiations don't
go so well.
What is the next, what's the, how does it from
a process perspective, how does that work? What are the,
what are the district's right, and what are the union's
rights? Sure. So when you are meeting and consulting, it
is not a, it's not a negotiation. Okay. Okay. Negotiations,
the contract has to be open in both parties, have
a agreed to that.
Yep. We do not reopen.
Contracts in negotiations, unless that is by mutual.
Agreement meet and consult is the obligation to listen to
the concerns of the associations.
And try and find solutions.
It is not the same as.
The contract negotiation process. Yeah. That then has like arbitration
or fact finding or those pieces.
Understood. So you let's say you can't find solu you
don't, you, you can't have a meeting of the minds
on solutions. What's the next.
Step procedurally.
I mean again, depending on what the, I feel like
I'm being asked to.
I mean, can you help me understand that concern? I'm
just trying to earn so I can try and cross
the process. Is there a process that frames.
Frames how this works, understanding that the contract.
Track dictates the terms and.
There, I mean, is it a grievance? I'm just trying
to understand what the next step is. If, if the
union says, no, our bus drivers cannot agree to do
for whatever reason. And there's a legitimate reason for that.
What is the next step pursuit? Sure. It would depend
on theirs. The grievance is a root is the route
to.
Object to the way a contract is being interpreted. And
then the main department of labor.
Has a prohibited practice complaint if there's been a violation
of labor law. So those would be two potential routes.
Again.
Depending on the nature of the complaint where the association
could escalate a concern.
So the nego, so
sorry. So the process, but the process has to conclude
by what date.
In order to be ready to go first day of
school.
Well, again, we enter
it doesn't have a timeline like that. I understand that
you're asking for one, it doesn't have a timeline like
that.
Because, you know, this year we started.
School without settled contracts. And we, we opened school.
We've had prohibited practice complaints that have been ongoing.
Over the last few years.
So again, you determine some rules to operate by while
you're in that process.
Okay. I, I hope that's addressed your questions. Yeah. My
general concern is we don't have people in the roles
that we are expecting them to be at the beginning
of the year that that's like that's that's, that's where
I'm like the end result is.
What if the, what if we're at a, at a
standstill, so that's sure. Yeah. So I'm just really trying
to visualize the process. I'll let somebody else ask a
few questions about the budget.
Member Holman. Thank you.
So
I'm gonna assume because you know, one of the kinds
of things that are a little bit murky in some
ways are like general.
Lines of supplies and those kinds of things.
And some of them, and I know there has been
inflation.
But there are some lines of supplies and things that
are really seem to have gone up quite a lot.
And
and there could be there's prob I'm not saying there
aren't good reasons for that. There really could be, but,
so for example,
an increase of 240,000 for supplies and materials for special
education administration. That might be completely valid. I just don't
know anything about it.
What line item Claire? Oh, excuse me. 1178.
1 1 7, 8, 7, 8. Is that right? Okay. Yeah, that's supply.
Services and materials.
Materials under special education administration.
Okay. It's Hmm, it's kinda outta, is it 1 7 78 was
gonna say 1 7 78, because one is not.
Okay, lemme look again. Lemme look again. Let me look
again.
No worries.
I wasn't looking until I was looking where I was
written down. Oh, sorry. That's fine. Yeah. I think one
sentence 78. Yeah, I think it's that one. I can
speak to it if oh, okay.
1 1 7, 7, 8 is what you're asking. Yes. Thank you.
Okay. All right.
Yes, it is exactly.
So in that line, we are budgeting for $250,000.
As it relates to the implementation of the new teacher's
contract.
Where time beyond 15 hours in a meeting.
Is paid time. So that line has gone up.
Because of that cost as it it's more services. Correct.
Okay. So that would be paid through payroll.
After a teacher has reached their.
15 hours of contractual time. That's the reason that line's
gone up.
Okay.
That's helpful.
And
there's another, I'm gonna just double check this.
I'm doing, I'm just double checking the notes.
I'm gonna hold off for right now.
Okay. You you're all set for now. Okay. Thank I'm.
Not guaranteed. No good. No, that's okay.
Other questions about the budget, other questions.
Questions member Richardson.
There's a, a pretty, just general increase.
In supplies and materials for most of the schools like.
There's a big bump. Is that.
Because
we had the free, like the co the, the non-essential
spending freeze. So we're no that that's because with, with
Kayla closing, closing, I've reduced some expenses. And then I
redistributed the rest of the other elementary schools.
Because we're gonna have a similar number of students.
Students. Okay. Yeah.
The, the closure of Kayla was represented as like a
$373,000 savings on the last budget presentation.
Roughly, I think
and when I look at.
Cost center or with a Caler cost center. That's a
lot more than that.
Can you help me? Can you just help me understand
the financial savings of the closing of a school better?
Because.
I'm trying to find I'm looking in last.
Last week's proposal where the number is.
Yeah, 378 reduced building costs. Mm-hmm .
Yeah, that's removing well, that's cutting costs, so, okay. Facilities
there's per school.
Costs the way we account for in our accounting system.
And then we have district-wide costs, which means costs that
are really for multiple schools.
So the Caler specific.
Account lines are reduced significantly. I left in some costs
because we're expecting to keep the school. So I've just
reduced utilities, but I've maintained.
Some utilities, right? If, cause we're gonna still have water
turned on, we'll still have electricity. We don't want the
pipes to freeze. And the like.
And then the other part is the whole district.
Costs where I reduced from the facilities, FY 27 budget.
Request. And that was line by line shaving things off.
With the idea that we're shaving off, you know, an
amount that approximates what it would be for Kayla.
Okay. Does that make sense? Yes. Okay. Sort of
mm-hmm and it all adds up to around that
roughly 400,000.
Okay. Yep. I have another question about moving costs.
Yes. So we have, you know, two.
Different types of moves. We'd be contemplating.
One with a, a closure.
That seems like a much smaller, less ex and smaller
to me means less expensive. I would think.
Versus a reconfiguration. Do we have an approximate?
Number for the cost of moving as it relates to
option a versus option B.
I mean, I put in 75,000 for moving costs. We've
gotten a recent quote. It came in between 16, 70,000
and we're still getting some other quotes.
Quotes for, for, like, for moving, like moving furniture, moving
stuff from one building to the other, both proposals.
Proposals because I have the same 75 K moving costs
budgeted for either way. And then.
What about
support for teachers and the cost of, of that. I
understand in the middle school for the middle school.
And this is hearsay. So may please correct me if
I'm wrong.
But I, I, I heard that teachers had like a
professional mover for each of their classrooms. Is that true?
Because that sounds amazing.
And okay.
And, and can we, will we give, mimic making that
process? And what is the cost of that for we
actually are getting the first quote that we got is
from the same company that helped us move from Mahoney
and Memorial. They delivered or packing crates for heavier materials.
Materials those materials were moved.
Moved from Mahoney and Memorial.
By that company. So
again, we were looking at a, a similar process.
For this, in addition, there's a contractual benefit.
In the teacher's association agreement with it is now a
paid stipend.
For those moves.
So those are things that we've factored into it, but
yes, we were looking at.
An outside vendor.
Providing some of that moving support.
And where are those costs?
Baked into this line item budget.
The moving stipends for teachers should be.
Somewhere thereabouts cost center one, the moving.
75 K that's in cost center, 11 and other it's
called other transfers.
Transfers. So that's mostly the nutrition deficit.
And then 75 K is, is built into there.
Okay, Zim have that number. Is it two, $250? Stipend,
perm, sorry, teacher. I'm sorry. Remember, what's your question? My,
my question is that moving stipend for the teachers is
that $250. I didn't do my homework on, I don't
have my budget in front of, yes. It's 250.
So you've it's it still has to be more expensive
for, to move when you reconfigure schools like.
I mean the there's right. I mean,
or I, I guess my brain doesn't how so? How
so? Can't.
Can't because we're moving.
Classrooms like we're Mo we have to, we have to
have.
I mean, I think we need to have different setups
that a cath pre-K through.
One school versus three to two to four, like.
You know, I know kindergarten classrooms have special specs and
designs that they in pre-K classrooms as well. I think
there's also some build out costs with that. So,
I guess, I guess I wanna unders I guess like
my next question is financially.
What is, what is, what is option B cost us
versus option B a cost us? And it, do we
have those numbers? Like.
I mean, I
do we know Joe, if the quote was different.
At, at this point because we don't have the specific
configuration, we're not able to model it.
Your hypothesis that we need to move different furniture in
those is, is not incorrect.
But every school currently has furniture.
In it. So we are likely focusing more on a
teacher's individual consumables and materials.
Materials that doesn't really matter.
Or not that it does, like it doesn't impact the
cost cuz in either proposal, those things need to move.
You are not wrong though. That pre-K and K.
Has different size furniture. So we need to make sure
that we have the correct size.
Materials. So, but again,
right now, our estimates are such that.
That is not a significant.
Difference between option a and option B.
But okay. But we don't know how, but we don't
have a number. Right. We don't correct. Okay.
Thank you member feller. Yeah. Have a question about the
percussion ed tech. So on behalf of the 32 people
who emailed me asking about the percussion ed tech.
Maybe it's a question for a building administrator.
Who are the other
staff in the room during that time. I think it's
middle school band. Is that right?
Correct. That would be our band teachers at both the
middle and the high school. Okay. Got it. And.
So I I'm, I'm trying to understand the rationale for
that cut specifically, cuz there's a tremendous amount of.
Community pushback on that position. So I imagine.
It's about the number of staff in the room.
Who remains there? Like is there just one person in
that band room now?
Correct, which is a similar model to most other schools.
And again, we
are willing to, to engage in the process in looking
at staffing schedules, are there ways that we can.
Make sections smaller and those collaborations.
Collaborations. But again, each one of the 75 positions in
this budget represents significant and real loss.
All of them.
Are are people who are impacted. And so.
The association, the
administration's position is that all of those need to be
considered and.
We respect the value that each one of them brings
to the organization.
Other questions.
Questions member Smith.
Relating to kind of teachers moving around. If we went
with option B.
Obviously, because of
seniority dictating most of the.
Decisions how much
movement. Do you anticipate
between schools with teachers and it, would it be significantly
less than option a or.
Are we still looking at, you know, and especially for.
Clarification to folks at home. It's not just about, you
know,
reducing care or teachers, and then mm-hmm, everything else
goes as normal, right. That there's gonna be significant sh
shifts among schools. And I just, can you just kind
of share a little bit about that?
Sure we are aware of that.
Again, we are, have not been able to start that
conversation with our teacher.
Association yet because we don't yet.
Have a decision.
On how we, how we would work through that.
Process, we would do it in consultation with our association.
With regards to the variables of how are we going
to make new staffing teams?
Each school has its own special and unique team.
And sort of identity.
In the staff culture. And we, we really need to
hear from our teacher leaders and our association leaders around.
How we would do that in the best possible manner.
Such that kids receive the services they need.
So it would, it would be fair to say with
both option a and option B teams are gonna change,
correct. Be significantly. Absolutely. Yes.
Thank you any further questions? No, it's all good.
Any other questions there.
Member rich.
I'd like to thank you everybody for sending emails, but
one particular email that stuck with me, and this is
related to process.
One email said that 91% of the members of the
teachers.
Teachers believe there should be more cuts to higher.
Level administration. And my question there as a school board
member.
It's my understanding the school board supervises the superintendent and
the budget.
Essentially, I've got a one over one complaint here.
Is there anything we can do as school board members
to address that concern?
More time.
Voting, no, the budget we brought you this evening is
representative of that concern. We've proposed two more reductions. It's
23% of the unit.
Okay.
Another process concern.
And this is just a question as a new board
member.
With this survey, I thought there was an interesting mix
of people who wanted to vote for option a or
option B, like support it. And then there was a
significant section that was UN unsure.
Is there any way we can carry, carry forward two
budget proposals and have it voted on.
By referendum. I don't believe that is possible, but I
would need to double check that I'm referring to inspiration
from the recent turf question.
we won't be able to start planning then until
June 9th, if you do that. Okay. Okay. And that.
To me doesn't represent the yeah. Concerns in the community
about being able to, to understand the process.
We would ha the referendum on the budget.
Goes in front of the town on June 9th. So you
wouldn't have an outcome there.
Okay. My final sort of process question was.
I think that
the teachers have asked us to go back to the
city council.
Is this the time where I start to make a
proposal for that.
That is not a question for me. That's a question
for the chair.
I, I can answer that. .
If, if there would be.
If you would like to make an action to go
back to the city council, it would be on Thursday's
agenda.
Be because we have to give the public notice.
Okay of an item and you can, but you could
put that on and we could vote on it on
Thursday to go back before the council. So the limitation
of making a decision tonight would be Robert's rules, not
you cannot and putting things on the agenda. Mm-hmm
well, it's not really just Robert's rules, but it's about.
Giving the public do notice.
Of items so that we can allow people who might
speak.
In favor or speak against.
An opportunity to know that an item is coming forward.
Member Richardson. I believe we can amend.
Vote to amend the agenda right now.
And we can take a vote as to whether or
not we wanna do that. That's my understanding of the
process.
If we have a Roberts rules expert in the room
that wants to help clarify. Great, Adrian. Let's hear it.
And it's my understanding, just to finish the question.
That we could approve tonight's questions in front of us
with amendments.
Amendments that's correct. Yep. And that's what I think the
venue would be.
Well, I mean, just so I'm clear member, rich, are
you saying, could we amend.
These motions that are before us. I think so. Yeah.
Is that your question? I think so. Yes. If that's
your question, we, we can, you can always amend a
motion. That's already.
Been noted on the table. Okay. Thank you for my
questions. Absolutely. Member Dowling.
Right.
Yes, it's absolutely permitted under Robert's rules to add an
item.
To an agenda on the spot.
However I would, I would just caution the board that
when you.
Do that, especially with something, with any kind of.
Financial impact attached to it.
It's it's not best practice to.
Do that without giving the public proper notice, because it
can be perceived as you're trying to sneak a vote
by the public without.
Without them having that opportunity to weigh in on it.
Theoretically, if, if all the new board members voted no
on the budget, then we could discuss it on Thursday
with an amended.
Sort of movement? No, correct. I mean,
if, if the budget doesn't matter, who votes? No, but
if the budget were to not pass tonight,
particular item of the budget, you know that we have
three front of us. We don't, we don't vote on
we, so it looks like we have three decisions.
Decisions? Well, well we do, but, but those are, but
the third one is.
Voting to pass the budget, correct to a, to, so
the first one.
Is to review the letter to the commissioner right on
the closure.
And so that would be.
A decision around closure, consideration, and action.
To choose between option a and option B is the
second.
And then consideration and action to adopt the FY 27
budget. So we could pass any one of those, right.
Or not pass any one of those. Right. There's three
different and separate motions.
Motions. Yeah. Thank you.
Member feller. I have a, I have a question for
the chair. Do you think mayor Tipton is watching right
now and she would meet with us on Friday? I
I'm not. That's I'm not making guesses about who's watching
and what they have going on in their life. I,
I, you know,
I, I read you the statement from mayor Tifton and.
If there's an action that people want to bring forth
on Thursday as member.
Dow link said it could happen tonight. And that's what
I was saying, but it's not recommended. It's recommended to
give.
Advanced notice to the public so that people are prepared.
So you could not pass the budget.
And then make a motion.
On Thursday.
To go back to the city council.
Mayor. I mean, no mayor not mayor no, thank
you. Member Richardson. Quite help.
But isn't there like a risk reward analysis you can
go through. I mean, what is the harm?
In, you know, I, I completely understand the lack of
notice.
And, and, and I, and I wanna respect, I respect
that principle.
However the harm is that we're asking to have a
conversation.
And we're not gonna
you know, if anything, we're just delaying the vote of
the, of the, of the approval of the budget.
Which I don't think it would be a surprise to
anybody.
In the public that we just saw a brand new
budget tonight and, and, and didn't approve it.
And I, I guess I just don't really see if
I, if I run down the, the.
The, if I run down the harm analysis, I'm failing
to see.
What's wrong with, with, with trying to have that conversation.
Because I do think that this is a citywide issue
and, and we do.
Wanna wanna talk with, I, I know I do. I
wanna speak with city counselors.
Member rush, given my recent training on FOA, I think
it's a concern with say newspapers or people who are
concerned about this and are doing other things. It's, it's
our duty to tell them that we're about to make
a decision. So let me correct myself earlier. I said
it would Robert's rule. It's really just common decency to
say we're gonna.
Make a decision. Does everybody want to talk about it?
So I, I think Thursday would be a good time,
you know, it makes sense. Mm-hmm .
Did you have something member? I have some questions about
reconfiguration, but maybe you wanna go to Claire? You who?
Over here's I'm sorry, member. That's Fineman. So what
I wanna hear.
Is what, what we would, I think, I, I think
it's not very clear what would be the topic of
discussion. So I think assuming there's, there were this meeting
with the city council.
That's what I think I'd like to, I think, needs
to be explicate a bit more.
And so I, I just recommending and I'm concurring with
what member rich said that.
Could happen on Thursday.
So I, I don't have an answer to that question.
Member Holman, but it's not on the agenda for tonight.
So again, somebody can make a motion.
As member rich just said, it's not really recommended to
do it. If we want to bring that motion forward.
And then have that discussion that you're talking about on
Thursday.
We could do that.
Just one more que more, more comment member rich. So
if I, if, if I put it in my head,
basically tonight, we would make a proposal.
That on Thursday, there would be an agenda item and
it would have certain parameters. You, you don't, you don't
have to do that. You can just tell me that
you want that on the agenda. And there would be
an item on the agenda okay. To go forward. And
we don't, we don't have to have an act action
or, or anything.
That was originally something that was discussed about tonight. It
was withdrawn.
So if there's, if there's a, an, a reason for
wanting to do that,
that would be on the agenda on Thursday.
Just by your request. Okay. Thank you. Absolutely. His request.
Yeah. Wait, wait, wait. We're not taking any, we don't
need a motion in a second. Okay. We have to
vote first. We, we, if it, somebody can just say
they wanna put that on the agenda and they can,
we, we can put it on.
Member feller. I got some questions about mm-hmm reconfiguration.
A lot of this goes back to last meeting. What
was presented last meeting.
The first question is what's gonna happen.
With the plan reconfiguration with the portables that are currently
empty and behind small. So for people that don't know
about those portables, there's two portable classrooms behind small school.
We would anticipate that those go back into circulation.
Okay. So not necessarily at small school.
No, I'm sorry. They are, they are, they're not planned
to be moved.
Moved, but we would likely need to use them as
office spaces or potential instructional spaces.
Is have we considered moving them?
That hasn't been part of our proposal.
Thus far. Cool. Got it. Okay. I have another question.
So it goes back to slide 21 from last time.
It was about the
capacity of each school and the enrollments and scenarios, a
and B.
So in scenario scenario a.
Skilling is four students over capacity. So skilling has a
380 student capacity. It's 3 84 in scenario a.
Brown has room for eight more students.
Students Dyer has room for 12 more students and small
has room for 40 more students.
Students. So we're talking a lot about equity of outcomes
here.
If the schools don't have similar CAPA, you know, they're,
they're similar.
Utilization rates that doesn't seem super equitable.
And in scenario B skill is again for students over
at school. Is there a way to look at this?
What I, I mean, I think that I, I, I
did answer this question last week that those are hypothetical
based on the number of sections. We would not put
a school pass capacity. We have capacity rate.
Currently figured out
in order to get to the specifics we need.
Action from the board.
So I think if you want to give guidance around
the capacity rates,
that you are asking the administrative team to be.
Aware of, we can take those back under consideration, but
did address this last week.
So
so I, I guess I'll just provide that feedback right
now and any.
Planned reconfiguration scenario.
I would hope that the schools on the east side
of town.
Have more
classrooms occupied and have basically a higher utilization rate than
the schools on the west side of town. So that,
that would be my guidance there.
I have another
okay. I have another question about reconfiguration.
I love that you proposed stakeholder meetings with parents. I
think that's brilliant. I think probably one per school might
be too few. So if there could be one in
person.
And one virtual meeting with parents and families to consider,
you know, what they would value in a reconfiguration scenario.
I think that would be great. But thank you for
adding that.
And the other thing on the presentation night, that was
fantastic.
Was a focus on academic achievement. Mm-hmm like, and
I think a lot of.
Folks on the board feel that way too is like,
we want to drive the conversation with academic achievement.
Regardless of who the student is, regardless on what side
of the outcome distribution they're on, but like academic achievements
should ground our discussions. So thank you.
Member Richardson.
Can is there a, so what's the timeline like this
I thought was.
I really appreciate the fleshing out of, of next steps,
but I do, I am.
Extremely cognizant of time.
So when would we anticipate.
Kicking off this.
Engagement.
If the board takes a vote on which option they're
going with this evening. Yep. Yes. Assuming that hap right,
of course, then I would say that next week we
would be able to provide an update on when that
first round of meetings is scheduled for.
We obviously have April break coming up in a few
weeks and we have elementary conferences happening. So those are
things to be mindful of.
But we are eager to start moving as quickly as
we can on this for these.
Meetings. And again, I, in no way.
Imagined that one meeting would be sufficient and tried to
indicate that with.
Begins with their, there are multiple conversations needed here. So.
And do you have an idea as to when you
would wanna conclude those conversations?
And I guess need to put it that way, need
to conclude those conversations.
Again, if we are
looking to be reconfigured for fall of first, September of
26.
We would need a different timeline than if we're looking
to be reconfigured for fall of 27.
And again, that would is going to dictate how compressed
that timeline.
Would be, but we are being asked to, to, to
consider.
Grade configuration. I mean the 4.2 is, is for the
20, 26 to 27 school year. So I think we'd have
to.
Sure you want me to speak about that one? Yes.
Let's assume that it's for the 20, 20 it's let's
assume it's for next year.
Sure. So I think the, the most intense part of
our community.
Engagement.
Would be over the next six weeks.
To be listening to our stakeholders.
Those are our families and our staff in each of
the schools.
Last week during the early release day.
There were some staff conversations to begin to listen to.
Elementary voices around what some of those.
Concerns and questions they had. So again, we've, we've already
begun to try and collect some of that information, but
would need to be more intentional about doing that. So
that phase would really be intense over the next six
weeks so that we could.
Then move forward with the planning.
Okay, thank you.
Member Holman.
I just wanted to say a little bit that I,
I, that.
A lot of people are terribly worried about what's gonna
happen. And they're, they're worried that.
About their most, their most precious thing in life is
their children.
And that's completely understandable.
I have to say
either way, no matter what we do, this is not
gonna be a comfortable process, but I don't have the
sense that there's no way.
Reconfiguration or, or the other.
Staying with the four with all the grades in the
school system. I, I don't, I'm not worried that those
can't be pulled off. I, I think we have, and
I think that wherever your children go, they're gonna be
in a good school because that's what we have. We
have good school and we have a amazing, I think
I said it before a great wealth of pedagog.
Pedagogical a pedagogical resource.
Within south Portland public schools.
I'm more worried about some of the things that we
are losing.
I don't know if this appeal to city council could
ever change something. I think the loss of.
Related arts positions at the middle school. Mm-hmm very
formative time is a really hard time to lose positions
like that when we need kids to explore and begin
to think, especially as we approach the age of AI,
where kids are probably gonna have to start thinking differently
than the way their parent were thinking, because of lot
of the think that they may have thought would be
available. Aren't gonna be so.
Though, you know, I, I don't know that there's any
hope by speaking to the city council, but those are
the kinds of things that I wish we would feel
like if we felt something like that could happen. I
think it would be very valuable. I don't know if
that's any, anything more than Pipestream. No, I do don't
know. I don't have a, a sense of what's possible.
Thank you member Richardson. I, I think the point of
going to city council.
Is, we do not have a budget in front of
us with a fun balance.
Yes, that is very concerning.
So the only way to build back fun balance.
Is to ask our taxpayers for more money.
So I'm gonna just
pause that comment member Richardson, and just say.
That's for when we have a motion on the floor.
So I would like to make a motion. I, I,
I am. I just wanna say Thursday is too late.
To talk to city to, to, to decide, to talk
to city council. We have to present a budget to
city council on Tuesday. Mm-hmm so.
It's too late.
So if we wanna present a responsible budget,
to city council.
That includes a fun balance. We have to make that
decision right now.
As a board.
And I'm sorry that that's uncomfortable if we're not providing
the notice that that, that we would, that we, that
we should be providing under the best of circumstances. These
are not the best of circumstances that we're in.
I I, if may I address.
The question. Yeah. Okay.
I, I also think there is another scenario.
Whereby the, the board can vote on the budget in
front of them.
And still then ask to convene with the city council
regarding fund balance.
That
seemed, and I, I don't wanna misrepresent our, our counselor
voices in that, but I thought I understood that to
be a potential conversation that they were willing to have.
Yes. Again, I respect that's if the board would like
to, to put those together.
But I do think there's a situation where you could
do them sequentially.
And
be looking at the same issue. So just for consideration
there.
So if I can go back to.
Questions about the budget. I, I have a couple, but
I, I don't wanna come in until I know that
everybody is.
Asked what they have to ask.
Couple of my questions was.
What were
first I'm wondering.
Why we're adding
we we're talking about reducing administrative positions, but we're adding
an early childhood strategist. So.
I I understand.
It's great, but why
why, why would we be adding a position at this
point?
Sure we're adding the proposal in front of you, is
that is an addition.
An additional position within the teachers.
Teacher's association as an early childhood strategist.
And that person would be helping with the oversight of
the CDs transition. So that is not an administrative position.
That's a teacher position.
That would provide
both expertise in early childhood special education.
The transition from four to five year olds and IEPs.
And again, that's not an administrative position it's within the
teacher's association.
Thank you. My other question is.
We've I, I was a little surprised to see a
change tonight again, in the.
D E I director's position. So we moved.
Moved already from director to coordinator.
Which is, which was about a $21,000 reduction.
And moving that to a strategist is only about an
$8,000 savings beyond that.
And that's only if we were.
Maintaining the person who's presently in the position.
So we could in fact have an increase.
Because if somebody else who's.
In the
recall with the teacher's union.
If there's a recall of somebody.
Who has greater
experience or greater years of teaching.
Or whatever we, we could end up with.
With a zero savings. Am I correct?
That is correct. Last week, when you saw the budget,
it had the potential for either a coordinator and or
a teacher role mm-hmm for that position in particular.
I think the
the change here again, as we've noted.
These changes do not represent significant bottom line.
Changes to the budget, what they are in response to.
Is the board and the public.
Requesting more reductions at the senior level of administration.
And so that is what we are in.
Responding to in the proposal in front of you.
This evening, certainly the, the board may take a different
position on this.
But again, these are not as Abigail has already shared.
The overall figure that we are seeking approval on has
not changed from last week to this week. So that,
that was my next question. I, I don't see what
the benefit is.
In making changes and
affecting more lives if we're not increasing savings. So.
You said that it was the.
Same budget. And there was, and there were, but we
had additional cuts. So we're affecting more people.
I'm not, I'm not following why we're affecting more people,
but we're not saving any more money. And my understanding
from the board.
Was that the rationale
rationale behind further cuts was to save more money.
Not, not just to equalize and I could be wrong,
but not just equalize.
Some, some changes. So
we've we have in this, in this scenario.
We have our
D E I director who already, and I had several
conversations with the superintendent about this.
So it was very clear that was going to be
moved to a coordinator position.
Not to a strategist.
And, and that was
all going to be that position.
Accepted a, an over a $20,000 reduction in pay.
Which was in, in essence.
A a demotion. So it was already a demotion.
Now we're adding
an an additional demotion to this, except we're eliminating.
Quite honestly, the one person we have in leadership.
Who is a bipo person.
And, and put, and for no reason we're not saving
any money. We're not doing, we're not.
Accomplishing anything except eliminating somebody's job.
So I, I, I can't support that. I won't support
that.
But I have some real questions about.
About what the rationale is around that. I, I just,
I don't see it.
Sure and potentially
other board members would like to speak to that cuz
some express, oh, the question is to you.
I mean, I'm not asking you, I've already answered the
question I'm I'm but, but what I heard from you
is.
That we've reduced just for the sake of reducing.
Leadership positions, but we haven't saved any additional money.
Everything this board is doing up here is about.
Is about the bottom line is about where, where are
we?
You know, so I just heard member Richardson talk about,
you know, we need some money in fund balance. We're
not, we're not, we're not just like moving chess P
pieces around. Sure. And the SA the savings have gone
back into some risk that we were assuming in facilities
costs.
And so the, the money that is saved from those
positions.
Positions is indeed in the budget to help us with
things like.
If the skill and boiler does break next year.
That we have some funds in the local budget.
That would allow us to rent an emergency boiler? Well,
I think it would be important to see those savings
because.
What I just said is there, there are no savings
in this particular position. It's not savings. The costs are
shifted, so, okay. But.
There isn't a cost shifting here is my point.
We, we, we reduce the position.
From director to coordinator, which was a $20,000.
Reduction that was a savings.
Savings. So you can put that $20,000 someplace else.
But if you move it to a strategist, you do
not necessarily save any more money, which I think you
just confirmed chair. Deans. Can I just offer a clarification
for this? Just to help? I, I I'm, I don't,
I really don't mean to interrupt you. I'm just trying
to, I'm just trying, I, what I see is we've
actually bought back to.
Teacher positions. Okay.
Yes. I think that is another way to, to look
at it. And it's another way that.
We've been asked by other members that are sitting on
the stage and members in this audience this evening. And
we've, we've worked to respond to that.
And I had a quick question to a comment, you
know, I'm very interested in D EI and formally rep
was a rep for why are you at work?
It was my understanding that there was a scrutiny of
the director of positions.
Positions and each position, the relative risk and leadership.
And the D E I position, we wanted to move
it closer to the, to the teachers.
Teachers and that particular position didn't have any direct reports
and there were other.
Director level.
Responsibilities that weren't there. That's my understanding.
Are there any other questions?
Questions.
Well, I, I just would say I think, yeah, when
one, I think anytime I do think that the.
Expectation that people have the, the idea to reduce administration
is not because administration bad, other things. Good. It's that
administration expensive. Hopefully money's saved.
Saved. My other question was, I know we had this
conversation and maybe this got remedied.
But there was an impact of.
6.9%. That was on the.
City side. And I, I, I know you were going
to have a conversation to see if we could get
that clarified. Can you help me? Correct? We did.
And
Abigail was able to remedy that it's on this slide.
Sorry. That is slide 26. If anyone wants to look
it up. Yeah. So the, sorry. So the middle column.
Like our 8.85, that that comes, that is derived by
dividing the.
Total amount asked by taxpayers by the total valuation.
Of the city of south Portland divided by a thousand.
We had a difference of opinion on what the valuation.
Was, and the city revised what the valuation was.
Thereby eliminating our discrepancy. So we worked it out essentially.
So it is 6%. Okay. Thank you. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you for that.
And
I get my last question was just.
Well, nevermind. I'll hold that until.
So what I wanted to do.
I'm sorry that I'm sucking on this. I, I, I
have a really bad cough and I'm trying to keep
from coughing up here. So.
I appreciate that.
If we can go to.
A board positions now with where we are.
On these three motions.
Motions.
School closure.
Is the first one. So let's.
Let's stay with review the letter to commissioner of education,
consideration of closing an elementary school and authorization.
For the superintendent to file a closing report with the
commissioner of education. I'm not asking to put the motion
on the floor until after public comment.
But, but I did want to have an opportunity.
To give board members an op, a chance to give
positions.
Who would like to begin? Okay.
I'll start. Okay. In regards to question.
Review review the letter. I believe there is a need
to close a school.
So I would vote.
In favor of that. And are you naming a school
member? Rich?
Let me think about that. Okay.
I didn't know we had to. Yeah, we've gotta decide
tonight if we're going to.
Closing an elementary school and authorization of the superintendent to
file a school closing report with the commissioner of education.
The, the letter would name the school. So member feller.
Okay. I prepared some remarks I'm gonna read, and I'm
both gonna talk about.
Whether I support closing a school. And if so, which
one?
School closure is something that's happening everywhere.
In Georgia, Atlantic public schools approved closing.
16 schools in Texas, Austin closed 10 schools after losing
10,000 students over a decade.
In Maine 15 schools closed in 2025 and 14 schools
closed in 2024.
This is a structural shift in American demographics and our
schools are the Canary in the coal mine for the
challenges that we're gonna face society in the next couple
decades.
I recognize that south Portland spent more than $26,000 per
pupil. More than every comparable district. We have data on.
Gorham spent 20,000 Wyndham spent 21,600.
Brunswick spent 24,000.
Even Portland, which serves twice our enrollment in a higher
concentration of high-need students spends less per pupil than we
do.
Our high cost, partly reflect the cost of operating five
elementary buildings for an elementary population that has been shrinking
for years.
And has sent 200 students, all fifth graders out of
elementary schools and into the middle school.
On top of that 200 lost to the middle school.
We've lost a hundred students due to demographic decline.
Wanna be really clear about this. I've talked to everyone
on the board.
No one on the board wants to close the school.
We do not want to close the school. No one
does school board to get in the business of closing
schools.
All the schools that we've talked about this year, we've
talked about closing three schools. They all have staff who
work side by side for years.
Closing school means that a loving community of students, teachers,
and staff.
Will be fractured and moved into buildings where they will
at least for some time.
Feel like outsiders, it means that the connective tissue of
a neighborhood gets pulled apart.
I'm really sorry that we're having this discussion at all.
Mostly reminded that if we.
Do not close a school and capture those fixed building
costs. We need to eliminate 12 to 16 additional positions.
Positions on top of the 78 that we've already eliminated.
The educators and support staff in this district show up
every day for our kids. And the last thing this
board should do is compound what we have already been
through an extremely.
Extraordinarily painful process by cutting deeper into the workforce that
remains.
Remains. Now we're gonna talk about the criteria that I
used to make a decision about which school merits closure.
Sorry, I'm gonna talk about the things that didn't influence
my decision.
The Portland pipeline tanks, bordering, Kor, and close to Dyer.
And the high school have been mentioned as a reason
to close Kor.
There is no evidence that the tanks pose an imminent
threat to the health and safety of students at either
school or the residents of the neighborhood, recent measurements by
the main D E P and published by the Boston
globe. About two weeks ago, measured an average of 0.81
micrograms per QIC, meter of benzene at the.
Fence line for the Portland pipeline tank farm. Next to
Calor main threshold for harm is more than twice that
at 1.28 milligrams per cubic meter, it's not about the
tanks.
Tanks. Some have suggested that Kayla has been selected for
closure because of the loud and vocal response from dire
parents and other parents.
Well, I appreciate everyone's passion for their school.
The board does not let the loudest voices dictate.
Our decisions.
Everybody loves their school.
There's very passionate PTAs across the city.
If we must close one school, I believe it should
be the school that minimizes harm both to the impacted
students.
Students and the families and the school district as awhole.
Taylor's enrollment as of March 20, 26 is 164 students.
Students the lowest in the district by a significant margin.
Taylor's not just the smallest school by student enrollment. It's
meaningfully smaller than the next smallest.
The next smallest school is brown with an enrollment of
194 students. Then dired 195 is all of March.
Small at 199 and skilling at 319.
Taylor is running at 68% of capacity. The lowest utilization
rate in our elementary system.
Kayla's location in the middle of the city and its
attendance boundaries mean that the majority of its students live
within a mile of either down Dyer or brown school.
So Caler is 1.1 miles from Dyer and 1.1, three
miles from brown.
Dyer is
1.2 0.2 miles.
From skill.
Skilling. So the AC the walkability will actually increase if
Taylor's closed students live closer to their neighboring school, which
will be brown.
Or Dyer. So
finally, I think the administration's job now is to engineer
a transition that respects the burden that we are asking
the commun Taylor community to bear.
I do not pretend to know if there's anything that
can soften the blow of losing Calor.
Kahler, but we need to listen to the voices of
the Kahler families and do whatever we can to re
ease their children.
Into new schools. Thanks.
Thank you.
Other members, member Smith.
Thank you, Daniel. I thought that.
Was very good. And, and I support pretty much everything
you said there. The only things that I'll add.
I know there's been a lot of discussion about.
Skilling and Kayla
Kahler and the density of students with the highest needs
in which schools were closing.
I just wanna speak to that a little bit by
saying.
My disposition against closing skilling is not just about the
students that are in the classroom now, but it's a
generational argument about what south Portland can and will look
like in the next.
10 15, 20 years. I think it's.
It's fair to say that we're not building elementary schools
anytime soon.
And we're not building them on the west side of
the city.
And I don't want to make.
Those who rent in our city, which are disproportionately on
the west side.
Have to travel across our district.
For the rest of their, the way that our district
looks, cuz we're not building elementary schools. I also wanna
make the point.
That our schools are gonna be pretty full next year.
But enrollment decline.
Almost certainly is not going to stop.
You look across the country as Daniel.
Made a really, really clearly.
Enrollment decline is going to continue.
There's no reason to think that housing is gonna become
more affordable. There's no reason to think that.
Immigration, anytime soon is going to increase.
And so we're left in a situation where this makes
the most sense, and it's really painful.
And so I, I think for, for all the reasons
that Daniel said, I support closing school and I, I
support closing Calor, but it's, it's not an easy decision.
Thank you member Smith.
Remember Richardson.
Are we just talking about closure right now? Correct. Okay.
Yeah, I think
both.
Member feller and Smith.
You know, really hit this, like.
And, and I walked the halls of Kayla.
On Friday and
it's a beautiful school.
And
the kids and the teachers love their school there.
We all love our school.
I'm the only board member.
With kids in the district right now, I'm the only
board member with elementary school aged children. So I feel.
Deeply this decision.
I know so many of you all in this room,
our kids have played on.
Playgrounds together on sports teams at rec camp.
It
it's devastating.
But I will say I was thinking about this, cuz
I know.
That there is this sense of.
A loss of community and.
You know, just how
how scary that feels to a child.
But every time.
A new child ends up in one of my son's
classrooms. It's the first thing they tell me.
They are so excited.
To meet new friends.
It's like a celebration for them.
And
this community will
receive children and staff.
In a welcoming and inclusive way. I don't.
Don't I don't think I don't, I don't see the
alternative. I, I mean, I know that we have different
cultures of staff and I know that that's.
That's complicated.
I, I appreciate that. I'm so sensitive to that.
But I do believe that the children.
Will be received and loved and cared for.
And
you know, each year our kids are in a different
class.
And I've always kind of, you know, I, I.
I've always welcomed that.
Experience because our kids are so young, they don't, they
shouldn't have best friends. You know, like I want my
kids.
To know any and everybody and learn from different children.
And I think.
You know, on a larger scale.
This is, you know,
a new class.
S with new kids and we'll all be starting fresh
together.
And, you know, I, I had to keep this decision
simple in my mind. I had to think about.
Number of students. And I had to think about size
of building. And I had to think about where it's
located.
And, and for reasons that.
Were already explained it, it was Kayla. It was not.
It was not an influenced, it was, it was, I
was never influenced by anybody's decision.
In any way.
I
I, I had to keep it simple.
And
we have a lot to rebuild together. We have, we
have to rebuild as a community together. I mean, there,
these cuts are devastating.
They're devastating.
We're fundamentally altering the way that we provide.
Educational opportunities to our children with these cuts.
Cuts. They are real. And those class sizes terrify me.
And
I still wanna find a way to talk about that.
.
We haven't really gotten to that in the budget talks,
but.
But I
that is where I stand on the closure.
Of a school and I believe.
It is Kayla that needs to close.
Thank you.
Other board members remember Holman? Yes. I wanna thank my
fellow board members for.
Speaking, so eloquently and passionately.
And
I I support what's been said so far.
In fact, my relationship with Kayla is that Kayla was
my.
Son's
sorry. It was his first school when he came here.
At each five and a half. I'm sorry.
He was five and a half when he came to
this country and did the summer program summer program there.
In English language and
I have, that was my first memory of.
Of having a child in a school.
And I'm very sorry. That's all.
I'm very sorry. Thank you, member Holman.
Okay. So there
does anybody else have any other? That was dumb. I'm
really sorry. that's okay. Member Holman. That's okay. Anybody
have anything else they want to add?
Member darling.
Thank you.
Does as others have have said.
Much more eloquently than I can say it. This is.
Not an easy decision. None of us.
Thought this would be a decision we'd be in the
position of having to.
Think about let alone, possibly vote on when we.
Contemplated being members of the board of education. I, I
live in a neighborhood that doesn't have an elementary school
anymore. It used to.
And so that, that is something that I, that I
think about. It's, it's hard not to think about it.
And.
Imagine what would've, what would've been.
If, if things had been different, it was.
In December, 2004, that.
The board voted to close the Mary Marshall elementary school in
Redbank village.
And bef the year before that they voted to close
the Hamlin school and in.
Years and decades before that there were.
What 10 other elementary schools.
That once existed that at some point were, were voted
to shut down and.
I too am very sorry that.
We were in this situation and I, I hate having
to.
Having to
contemplate this decision, let alone.
Take a position on it, but.
For all the reasons that others have.
Have stated and with a heavy heart.
I, I
support closure of killer.
Thank you.
Anyone else? I mean, Amish.
I'm kind of dumb sometimes. And somebody asked me, you
know, which school we're closing. I said, we're closing Kayla.
Right. You know, that was on the list.
I'm a process guy and I'm kind of mad.
That we didn't have a rubric. We didn't have planning
to this point. It feels like.
Somebody erased something and said, now make a choice.
I think we need to focus more on process.
If we retain our assistant superintendent next year.
This is our, this is outrageous kind of, you know,
just saying, oh, just make a choice.
I'm not gonna make too much of it, but I
think we need to focus on process and, and.
Making these decisions in a, in a process oriented way,
instead of going one by one, because I think there
was more.
That's all I gotta say.
Thank you member rich.
The second issue again, before we go to public comment
is on.
Reconfiguration.
Or full band.
Full grade band model. So it's option a or option
B.
We would like to forget.
Member Dowling.
Option a
okay. Thank you. Member Smith.
So I got some prepared remarks, so I don't.
Don't say dumb things.
So I'm, I've been convinced through this process.
And this is not where, where I was initially leaning,
but I've been convinced through this process. The reconfiguration is
the best way to equitably distribute resources across our district.
And I'm most concerned about continued uncertainty next year. And
be, if we stick with a K four model this
upcoming year,
in my view, that choice would either create another year
of conflict within our community. That would keep us from
other pressing issues that next year's board and new superintendent
needs to take up.
Or to continue a model of education that because of
the way our city is designed and our current enrollment
numbers would continue to distribute resources.
Resources and opportunity unevenly.
I've already talked about enrollment decline, a K four model.
Which puts three of the four schools at two classrooms
per grade.
Would lead to a scenario with unequally distributed class sizes.
Sizes and unequally distributed, extracurriculars support staff specialists, professional development
opportunities.
Academic alignment very easily.
You can imagine a situation where.
A few years down the line, another 10% enrollment decrease
and we have one school with a class sizes of
12 and another with 24.
And then we're putting the same situation again.
Where we're talking about closing schools.
Or shifting things around.
Where one school might be managing the highest density of
high needs students with the same amount of resources as
a school with lower density.
These issues will only continue to compound as enrollment, declines,
and reconfiguration allows us to mitigate these concerns and improves
our ability to support students at every level level.
I completely recognize that this process has been far from
ideal.
Our current challenges are something we should have seen coming.
And the many years of community discussion about our current
inequitable distribution of resources could have organically led us to
reconfiguration with a longer on-ramp and more community buy-in no
one can dispute that.
It is also not my ideal scenario.
I have heard from many who are understandably concerned about
reconfiguration, and I understand and appreciate how much fondness there
is for a K four model that keeps families and
schools for longer.
Deepens community connection and limits logistical challenges for families in
multiple children.
This is not a decision that is without significant trade-offs
and there will be real losses with reconfiguration.
That we'll have to work hard to plan for and
mitigate.
I honestly would prefer that my kid goes to a
K four school when he enters schools in a few
school in a few years.
But the benefits that come from reconfiguration are clear, even
if the details have not been fully fleshed out, not
just for next year, but for many years to come
our schools, we better integrated our resources better distributed and
our teachers better supported.
It'll provide more financial certainty and stability, and it'll keep
us from having to make more painful decisions down the
road.
It'll be a big change, but is far from unprecedented.
Many districts have done it. And we have a ton
of capital Le capable leaders and teachers in this district
that have been working very hard all year and will
continue to work hard to make this work.
I was actually reflecting with my mom.
Last week that I was actually one of the second
graders who had to move to a new school in
third grade when our district reconfigured 25 years ago.
And I had forgotten that fact until last week, even
after spending all of my waking hours the last few
months, thinking about reconfiguration .
I don't know what to make of that, but I
have fond memories of both my elementary and intermediate schools.
If we do, in fact reconfigure, I ask that parents
and teachers and taxpayer.
Pay payers go into this with an open mind. I
also implore voters, even if they do not support the
details to vote. Yes. For this budget in June.
Because whatever you think of reconfiguration, a no vote would
lead to more cuts and less time to plan and
cause even more pain for our community.
Thank you members now, member Dowling. I mean, member, fellow.
Yeah, I'm not gonna bury the lead. I don't support
reconfiguration tonight.
I really didn't support reconfiguration a couple months ago.
And then I went into all the schools and talked
to teachers and administrators.
They made a very good case.
I'll try to, from everything I've heard, I've tried to
distill the case in the reconfiguration.
Into two points. Okay. So rationale one for reconfiguration reconfiguration
improves outcomes for all students, regardless of who the student
is.
Elementary schools with more teachers at the same grade level,
provide an opportunity to more effectively and officiate differentiate instruction
for each classroom.
So to paint a picture of what this might look
like.
In a typical third grade classroom right now in our
elementary schools.
One teacher may have students who are working at a
first grade level all the way up to students who
are reading at a fifth grade level.
With one teacher per classroom.
A certain group of students with an ability level, they're
gonna get less tailored instruction.
So if we have larger schools, we'll be able to
differentiate instruction to a higher degree. That that seems like
a no-brainer to me.
Second reconfiguration will help kids socially. So I, I heard.
Not one, but two very powerful anecdotes.
Anecdotes about kids who showed up to an elementary school.
And for whatever reason, they couldn't find their people.
They didn't find kids with common ground. I don't know
if the, the kid didn't like golf or something or.
Or dinosaurs, but
more kids in a school. It's gonna be easier for
students to find peers who they will be friends with
in middle school, in high school. So I, I really
see that.
But I just think there's so much resistance to reconfiguration
right now from such so many parents and teachers is
because we don't know what it's gonna look like.
And I need to know what it's gonna look like
to vote for it.
I have a lot of confidence in our district. I
think our district can do this in a compressed timeline.
Like not only do we have incredible staff in admins
here, but our parents.
Are so smart and so dedicated and are willing to
put in the work.
So I really think we can do reconfiguration.
I don't, I'm not worried about doing it this year,
but I'm not voting it for it.
Right now, because I don't know what it's gonna look
like, and I can't vote for something that I don't
understand. I just don't understand.
Where the attendance lines are gonna be drawn.
I don't know exactly what the schools are gonna be
look like in terms of staffing. I just there's so
many unanswered questions right now that I just, I can't,
I can't vote for it.
Thank you. Member feller I'm member Richardson.
I do not support reconfiguration.
I want
to support it at a different timeline.
That's not an option that we have in front of
us.
We are in
a serious
budget.
Crisis. We
have let go of 12% of our staff.
We
have to meet and consult.
With staff and teachers.
Teachers and spend, I think.
A decent amount of time working through.
What the, the proposed changes are supposed, how, how that's
supposed to play out.
We have to close a school. That is a financial
decision.
Reconfiguration is not a financial decision.
It might make more sense.
But
the
the pace at which.
We think we can pull this off is very concerning
to me.
I have a lot of respect for the players.
Involved that that are telling me that they, that they
can work this out.
But I have heard so many times we haven't figured
that out yet.
And that is really concerning.
Staff morale is very low right now.
Teacher retention is an issue.
I am very concerned that we are pigeonholing.
Too many things into this fiscal year.
And I'm also concerned that the voices that spoke out
against reconfiguration.
Were painted as privileged.
And sometimes racist.
This needs to be a collaborative.
Exercise and it has divided our community.
I have spoken.
To so many parents.
Teachers administrators.
And staff
and my swag is that a lot of classroom teachers
don't wanna reconfigure.
Reconfigure and a lot of the instructional support staff do.
They have a viewpoint.
Into the, into the needs of our students.
Students classroom teachers.
Take on so much.
Responsibility in a given day.
And I'm really concerned at the outcome of the S
P T a survey that shows me.
That the people are split and, and a decent, a
quarter of that union.
Doesn't even know what, what, what, what we should do.
That's really concerning to me because we're asking to.
We're asking them to do a lot.
Already
with 12% less staff.
And a closed school.
And we also think
on top of that, we can reconfigure our schools in
four months.
It's a shame that this board could not continue. The
equity concerns that were identified by the boundaries and configuration.
I will continue to say that.
Because it would've been a much easier sell.
Had we continued to talk about the issues.
Issues tonight was the first time.
We've seen in this entire.
Process the academic
outcomes of our elementary schools.
Tonight.
I still don't understand.
How reconfiguration is going to solve for that.
I want to understand
because I don't wanna be seen as anti progressive or
anti inclusionary.
I, I want, I want.
I want to have better academic outcomes, but I have
not been shown that this plan does that.
And maybe it does.
And maybe it will. And I hope so because I'm
very likely on the other side of this vote tonight.
So I really want whatever we decide to work out.
And I echo what member Smith said.
Please support our budget. It will be a disaster. If
there is a vote. No.
It will mean more cuts. It will mean more destabilization.
So, whatever we decide tonight as a board.
I believe that all of us have really thought this
through.
I know I've not been sleeping. I've been yelling at
my kids a lot. I've barely talked to my husband.
.
Like, this is the most intense thing I've ever gone
through because I feel like the weight of the world.
Is on my shoulders because I do not want our
kids to fail.
So I come back to.
Why would we do everything?
And anything in four months.
Without a real plan.
We don't have to, this is not a financial decision.
And that's what the budget is for.
Thank you member Richardson.
I have memorization Holman.
And Dean
if you want to, but we're to make a comment
right now, I'm more confused than ever. .
My emails have been
I'd say a majority of people who say there's a.
Lack of trust in the process. And again, I'm a
process guy.
But we haven't made a decision.
For the administration to flesh that out.
So I feel like we haven't made a choice to
make the choices.
At the same time I had this very impactful email
from the, the teachers.
Teachers association and it summed up what I thought.
25%. Don't know which way to go.
The other groups are either for or against reconfiguration.
So I'm still kind of thinking.
And it's not for
yeah. Still thinking
remember home.
This is a, this is a very difficult process.
And
I've gone back and forth in my mind about it.
I guess
in, I, I, I, I, I.
Feel that Tyler Smith has expressed a lot of the feelings
that I have, which is that I think in the
long run, if we reconfigure, it's gonna be less disruptive.
I think that it will put us on a good
path and.
I, I, I, I think that the, the feeling that
things are too rushed and that the feelings of not
having.
Confidence. I think those are feelings that are completely natural.
And because
because we don't like change.
That's that that's across the board.
And I mean, I don't set myself apart in that
regard.
I wish you weren't facing the, any of these questions.
Questions.
But I, I guess I feel that it gives us
a better chance.
Towards equity. I think that will help academic outcomes. Yes.
Certain things aren't known, but I feel that.
Some of them would be hard to know what, unless
you already.
Are going along the path. So.
Yeah, I think my
my direction right now is.
To reconfigure.
Thank you.
Member rich. I would just like to make one comment
based on that, I was thinking about this today. There's
a bunch of people who are resistant to change, but
there's so many people who want to make the change
and they want to do it confidently. Mm-hmm people
have sent me like 25 point questions. They thought about
this. So I think there's like a group of people
out there. If we could just.
Harness them somehow and just ride this thing and just
make it right. But we don't have the time.
So that's all I have.
Thank you.
I, I will say, I agree. This is a difficult
decision.
And the board can only make decisions that impact the
next fiscal year.
So we cannot do anything that has financial implications for
a subsequent year.
I met with a group of caregivers a bit ago.
And.
One of them said that I often talk about diversity.
And said that diversity is not only about skin color.
It can be cultural, socioeconomic.
Learning abilities, sexual orientation, gender identity, neuro divergence. It's much
broader than what I have implied. And I want to.
Thank this person for highlighting those points, because I believe
she's right.
The second thing is when I talk about my communications
with folks.
They are totally anecdotal. It is not to imply.
That others don't have equally important anecdotes. Mine are based
on those with whom I communicate and I don't speak
with everyone.
So many of you have conversations that are also important.
I think to make this decision, the board needs to
ensure a few things.
First, we need to be able to say, we can
make this happen.
That we will listen to challenges that we will form
focus groups to brainstorm.
The challenges that may occur.
And that we will do everything we can to help
resolve those problems.
Problems. We have to be able to acknowledge that some
things won't surface until the fall, because.
We can't predict them.
But that will pay attention, but we will pay attention
and help solve them as quickly as we can.
We need to listen to each other, trust each other
and work together for it to be successful.
A good friend of mine sent me a clip that
said,
there's a town in Italy that puts the local politician
who makes the dumbest decision in a cage and dunks
them in the cold river while the town watches.
So he was trying to lend some humor to a
very difficult situation. And this is surely one of those
times.
A friend for whom I have great respect said recently.
This calls for situational awareness.
And he's right. We need to think about where we
are and what is needed.
Today, the second thing.
Is that when I talk about.
I'm sorry, this is like repeating.
The same page. I believe reconfiguration is what is right
for kids.
This is my first concern. What's right for kids.
And I wanna say that I've come 180 degrees.
And remember Holman can speak to this.
For sure. I, when the boundaries and configurations first came
forth with their recommendations, I was not in support of
them. And I'm still not in support of the way
that they were recommending that we reconfigure. But I think
this plan can work.
The benefits are all the things that were highlighted.
Grade level collaboration, teacher access to instructional support.
Greater opportunity for friends groups.
Professional development for teachers developmentally specialized instruction.
And the, and a better mirror of our district demographics.
Demographics. I think there's also.
Staffing inefficiencies, which include ESOL and.
Strategists and specialists.
I think there's inconsistent access to multi-tiered systems of support.
And inequitable access to programming for the academically gifted.
And, and I think at present.
There's a lack of community at some schools, students do
not. Students do not have peers who speak the same
home language.
Leading to feelings of isolation, limiting opportunities for native language
clarifications.
And potential for students to feel like outsiders in the
learning community.
Students may be one of two to five students receiving
programming causing isolation.
Lacking a peer cohort court.
And have no sense of the community.
And the effects of not redistricting without reconfiguration, the closure
of one school will likely exacerbate the inequities that already
exist.
Based on the current class sizes across the district.
Without redistricting all schools.
Skill and will likely absorb about one half of Kayla
since they have about 70 empty seats.
Seats as compared to 50 at Dyer.
35 at brown and 20 at small.
It's small from an, from an equity lens. It certainly
doesn't help.
If we strive to put forth a budget.
That improves educational outcomes.
Outcomes. This moves us further from the goal.
I know we don't all agree.
And that means some people will be unhappy about the
decisions that are made tonight.
And I hope in the end, however.
It goes, however, it goes.
That we can work cooperatively and make for the best
outcome.
We can for kids.
So I also support reconfiguration.
I, I also
I, I just wanted to say.
For me, this is just my, just my opinion, which
is only one of seven. But.
Academic outcomes are less important to me.
I academic outcomes have to do with.
Students' ability to perform on standardized tests.
And they are primarily
regulated and standardized.
Over years over decades.
By not a diverse population. So that concerns me as
well.
And I would say about the recent survey that we
received information about.
Yes, we received 77% of this and.
90% of this, but, but we don't know of what
number.
Like we know how many people were surveyed, but we
don't know how many people.
Responded that was not provided to us.
And that's critical piece. If you, 77% of 10 is
very different than 77% of a hundred.
So
yeah. So I think we've heard from everybody on that
and.
The last thing is consideration and action to adopt the
FY 27 superintendent's budget.
As the board's budget proposal for the city council.
Who would like to begin that discussion?
Daniel.
I'm sorry, but member feller Rosemary. I.
I love you to death. I do. I'm. I'm not,
I'm not interested in your comments about my comments. Okay.
Okay. But I, I just, so no, I, I don't,
I don't wanna hear that. Okay, cool. I'll talk about
the budget. Thank you. Yes, sir. Talk about the budget.
Thank you. You can cannot like what I said, that's
what, okay. But I think every dollar that we spend
should be focused on academic.
Excellence for every student in our district. Mm-hmm .
I wanna start by acknowledging this is an absolutely devastating
budget.
We've had more than 78 roles eliminated.
While retirements and resignations have softened this blow a bit.
We still have more than 60 talented, early career educators
and staff who will leave the district. It's a tremendous
loss for our students and for the individuals who dedicated
the past several years of their life to our district.
I apologize on behalf of the board.
For this challenging experience, we must evolve as a district
so that we're never putting early career educators in this
position. Again.
In 20 17, 10 years ago, south Portland had a staff to
student ratio of 5.2 to one.
The proposed cuts would result in a 4.7 to one
student staff ratio.
Which is still 11% lower than the staff to student
ratio 10 years ago.
Now it's abundantly clear that today we need more staff
to deliver a quality education to Portland students than we
did.
10 years ago, we've added hundreds of students who require
specialized instruction for both English as a second language, as
well as in special education.
And also the proposed 4.7 to one student to staff
ratio is significantly lower than that, of Portland's, which is
5.1.
To one as of 2025 per the national center for
education statistics.
I do appreciate the
administration responding to some of our requests.
Requests about eliminating director roles.
I think when we all first saw this budget, we
felt like the cuts were unevenly distributed.
And that the pain was really localized in certain units
and that.
The central office wa in building administrators were, were spared
from that pain. I.
I still believe that to be.
A bit true, but I know that you have been
very thoughtful about the cuts to that unit.
I will support your budget.
If you reinstate the percussion EdTech.
Here it is.
It's thank you.
Other members wanna speak on the budget, a member Richardson.
I, I, I am not in support of this budget.
Right now, I think
I think we need to consider.
Talking to city council.
Asking for more money or asking for a higher tax
increase.
as I said before, we have fundamentally.
Changed how we're going to be delivering education.
I am.
Really unhappy.
Unhappy with these cuts.
Cuts. I know cuts had to be made.
But
I don't understand.
Why we would cut.
Our only behavior.
Education strategist.
The person that we have is the go-between between general
ed and special ed. We are essentially forcing kids to
special ed with that. Cut. I don't understand that.
I don't understand why we've cut four multi-tiered specialists roles.
If we are reconfiguring our schools, we have diluted the
resources to support the students in those schools.
That is very confusing to me.
We have very large class sizes.
Sizes kindergarten is 20 students.
Students, that sounds like a nightmare. .
We have cut physical education.
From our middle school, like we've, we've severely diluted physical
education from our middle school students.
Students, we all know.
What it does to our bodies in mind when we
move them.
And just last year, this board.
Was talking about preserving the mental health of our students.
Students, these cuts.
Cuts completely ignore that.
I don't envy the administrators in how they made these
cuts. I know these were challenging cuts, but they don't
make sense to me in terms of the goals that
we're trying to achieve.
I don't understand them.
We have removed a physical education teacher.
Who I know based on seniority.
Can no longer retain this job.
But this person provided
provided access to extracurricular activities to students who did not
have access to them.
That is D E I, and this person is gone.
And we've lost an entire curriculum of percussion.
I don't see it as an EdTech to an EdTech.
I see. We've lost.
Percussion. Like, I, I don't understand. .
Middle school, class sizes.
Sizes are smaller than elementary school classes.
I don't understand.
I don't know what you can do.
But I can approve this budget.
As it on its face.
And I may be the only one.
But I can't approve it.
I see a large number of increase in stipends across
the board.
What is why
that could be somebody that could be the ed-tech percussionist.
That could be the TPE teacher.
I don't understand.
This is a really challenging budget, but it is not
as lean as it could be. And it did not
prioritize.
The right positions.
Positions. Thank you.
Member Holman.
I'm next. You don't have to be. Thanks. like
you don't have to be member rich.
I think I said it earlier, you know, I had
my peas and QS figured out, and then I got
this.
Teacher's email. That was really impactful because it concluded a
survey. And I don't care if it was two teachers
that said.
90%, you know?
They have a problem with this budget. I think it's
time to have some like airing out.
And take some time.
So Elani might not be the only one who votes.
No. So that's all I have.
Welcome. Thank you. There was another, no, wasn't it. Okay.
Did you want go now? No.
I have
Smith Dowling, DeAngelis.
Smith.
I'll I'll keep it short. I, I totally.
Understand and appreciate everything that member Richardson said. I think
there's nothing equitable about cutting resources in schools and that
it's inevitably gonna affect.
The students who need it most, and there's no getting
around that.
With that said, you know, I.
I appreciate the work that the administration has put into
this. And.
I trust their judgment on the positions that were cut
and.
I, I support the budget.
Thank you.
River darling. Thank you.
I feel like a broken record saying that this has
been.
Difficult. You've you've heard that from everyone.
And you've also heard that we've been.
We've been trying very hard to, to listen and communicate
as best as we can.
We've we've
yeah.
I don't know where I was going with that.
Except to say that this was not an easy decision
and I like many members have, have lost many nights
of sleep and.
It's the last thing I think about when I go
to bed tonight at night. It's the first thing I
think about when I wake up in the morning.
I've been living.
Breathing this budget since, since December.
So not, not in any way, an easy decision.
But for, for reasons that other have others have stated.
Stated
I am in support of it. Yes.
Member home.
I don't hold out a lot of hope that we're
gonna get some big changes.
Changes. However, I do wonder.
If we met with the city council, what they would
have to say to us,
I I do. I, I just wanna respond a little
bit also. I mean, I do think that a survey
that doesn't show us what the numbers are, is.
Not great because we don't know if it, it was,
you know, and we just, we don't know enough about
the strength of the survey. If it's, if it, it
could only be just a handful.
And we've heard of heard enough handful of individuals so
that I have to say, I, I do wish the
number were down there. That's that's in our statistics 1 0 1
class. I'm pretty sure.
When you do your tables, but I'm not insulting anybody.
I don't mean that that came out the wrong way.
I am so sorry.
But, but anyway,
but, so I, I guess I I'm, I'm interested in
having a little bit of little bit more time.
I may
I I'm not dead set against this budget. I'm upset
with a number of things about it.
I expect to be upset with a number of things
about it, but.
I guess
if we make a, I think if we are able
to vote on vote on get two things accomplished tonight,
I'd feel we got a lot done and I'm, I'm
willing to wait a little bit on the budget.
Thank you.
I will say I'm also not in support of this
budget.
I I'm very concerned about the.
The last minute change in the D E I position.
And I think that if we're looking at reconfiguration, which
it looks like we are.
We're looking at
a lot of changes in this district. And a lot
of kids being moved around.
And I think that having a D E I coordinator.
Is really critical.
And, and should be, should be a priority. Like we're
not ready to move that to a strategist position, which
is a teaching position versus.
So there's the question with a strategist of.
How do we, how do we teach this, this piece?
Versus a coordinator, which is how do we embed this
in our curriculum?
And I think we're at this phase.
And I think we need support and help from our.
From somebody who has lived experience and who can understand.
What it is we're talking about and what it is
our needs are.
So I can't support this budget.
That's that's one.
And the, and the other reason is.
There are some special ed positions.
Positions that have been cut that I think are significant
and are going to affect.
Some of our special education programs.
Programs in a
in a, in a way that I think is not
really going to be easy to recoup. So.
For those two reasons.
Reasons I will not support this budget tonight.
So
we're going to go to.
Public comment.
And I'm going to
read the opening before we do this, but the board's
public comment.
Time is an opportunity for the board to listen to
opinions of the public.
That relate to the school and education matters on or
off this evening's agenda.
The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed to
the microphone and state your name.
And the town or city where you reside.
All questions will be recorded by the superintendent and or
the chair, and will be answered at the end of
public comment.
To the extent possible.
If answers are not available, someone will be assigned to
reply to you.
As soon as the answer is available, you'll be given
three minutes to speak.
There will be no interaction between the public and board
members.
Additionally, no clapping, booing or other interruptive behavior will be
allowed. And I really appreciate your cooperation with that.
As a reminder school board meetings are broadcast, live recorded
and posted on the city's website. So please consider the
impact of your comments.
Comments, so I can see there's a number of people.
And I just wanna say it's eight, 15.
Our goal is to get back to the board.
To allow for, for
comments and
for the, and for the vote on these three items
tonight.
So I would just ask that you just consider that
if you have something new to add,
if you have not spoken before.
I I'm not gonna stop anybody from speaking.
But just to consider that you've heard the position of
board members.
And, and I know that everybody.
Was tired after the last meeting last week.
Our goal is to get everybody home at a reasonable
hour.
And settle in with whatever decisions this board makes tonight.
So if the first person would come forth. Sure. Thank
you. Hello. My name is Sierra bowler and I'm a
resident of south Portland.
This is only my second budget meeting, so I may
be missing something. But why is reconfiguration being talked about
as inevitable, when you also said the research and models
haven't been fully explored?
Everything I have read.
Suggest that fewer transitions leads to better outcomes.
Outcomes. And frankly, the board doesn't seem to have enough
information.
It's almost as if they are, are forced to be
gambling with our children's future.
From my own experience, my daughter started kindergarten.
Really nervous. She learned, she leaned on the nurse and
the counselor a lot.
Now towards the end of first grade, she's confident and
thriving.
That stability made all the difference.
A pre-K to one model.
Is hard to grasp.
The youngest kids need stability most.
These are the exact years when they're learning to read
how to be in school and trust the adults.
Around them. If we disrupt that foundation, we risk long-term
confidence.
We all want equity. And I understand this is a
budget meeting where you're trying to solve for more than
one issue.
But let's not lose sight.
That stability is equity.
Equity stressed parents and teachers do not make for stable
leaders.
It creates a system where kids are constantly changing schools.
During the exact years when they're learning how to read
and how to trust. Oops, sorry.
Option a doesn't just sound risky.
Risky. It sounds very irresponsible.
We owe everyone's solutions that have been truly thought out
and work for long term's goals with the proper research
and planning.
Completed. Thank you.
Thank you, Sarah.
Hi.
Sarah Gay. I'm a south Portland teacher and parent I'm president
of the south Portland teachers association.
We did send a letter.
This weekend to our board. And for the sake of
time, I'm not going to read that letter and it's
entirety.
Partly for that reason. And also because some of those
concerns have already been discussed, which we appreciate.
I will share some data points though, that haven't been
shared yet. The survey was taken by approximately 50% of
our union. So it was not the most robust participation
the numbers were on the chart. Just sorry.
That is a significant number for the amount of time
that we had the survey open, which was fairly limited
because it felt quite urgent to get this information in
some sort of documentable form.
Now that we have any more clarity, we will continue
to survey and hopefully have more participation as well as
more granular information to share.
But of those surveys, 77% of our members agreed that
this budget process was rushed and that much more detailed
information should have been available to educators and the public.
Much earlier 78% of members surveyed believe the superintendent's budget
cuts too many support staff roles.
80% of members surveyed believe the superintendent's budget cuts too
many certified professional positions from our bargaining unit.
And those cuts in particular will have a sharp and
immediate impact on our students.
Students folks have referenced the fact that there was not
consensus.
Amongst those teachers surveyed regarding one elementary plan or another.
And I noted in the letter that the lack of
consensus to me is.
Really quite troubling.
And some of that, I know we have like high
school, middle school folks who may really just be somewhat.
Not investing in thinking about that process. And we are
surveying unilaterally. We can be again, more granular, but to
the end of helping us better understand, I'd like to
request that you share any peer reviewed research, professional publications
or expert references, the district or board have referenced in
order to draw the.
Conclusion that one model is overall better for kids than
another.
Further summarizing that letter, our request was to encourage you
the board to meet and consult with not consult, meet,
discuss, et cetera, with the city council.
Because the offer was made to meet mm-hmm whether
it was rescinded or not, the offer was made.
Which means that our city leaders see the situation we
are in.
And recognize that we're in trouble.
So please consider
at least listening to the people who have said, Hey,
we'd like to help you.
Member Richardson. Thank you, member Richardson. I can share a
little more clarification about what happens after a meet and
consult.
So during those meetings we do, as Dr. Prince said,
provide feedback. We work with the district to try to
mitigate concerns, create compromises anywhere we can.
If we are able to, if we are not able
to reach a consensus.
The board may still move to adopt the budget and
continue pushing forward with those changes.
Changes then we do something called impact bargaining, which does
have the potential to reopen our contract. And that's where
we would have to negotiate the impact of those changes
to working conditions.
And if there are changes to ed policy that impact
those working conditions, that's three minutes.
Hi, Kate Porter. I'm at the middle school and I'm
a representative for the S B T a. And I
yield my time to Sarah.
Thanks Keith.
So impact bargaining is something we can certainly discuss further,
especially with board members who may be participating.
With regards to new positions being created in the S
P T a bargaining group. There are three being proposed
tonight. Dr. Prince is correct that those positions must be
filled in accordance with our contract.
Namely our recall process, which is an article 18. If
anyone would like to read at home.
No new hires. According to this piece of our contract,
no new hires can be made unless there is no
one on our recall list certified to hold that position.
We have many.
Exceptional and exceptionally qualified educators currently on our recall list.
And being fiscally thoughtful, we feel it is important to
note that shifting positions between impact areas is a shift,
not a true reduction.
Purely from a financial perspective.
I have a personal statement.
I I'm a music parent. I'm married to a south
Portland band alum.
Bandom it's something that matters very deeply in our family.
So I am also strongly in supportive the ed tech
percussion position.
But I was more uncomfortable with the fact that there
was a single slide.
Defending that cut when there was not such a slide
provided for other con other positions that are.
Equally significant.
It felt a little bit unkind and unnecessary to call
out that single position in a slide with the implication
that those people are not.
Considering other positions with equal weight.
Just personally that did not sit right with me.
I have a couple of questions. How much funding and
time is being allocated for summer transition work specifically for
elementary school staff.
And that is both how much funding is going to
be set aside to ensure that work happens involving the
teachers who will be living it. And then how much
time are they anticipating so that we can budget that
time into our summers.
Summers and then a big one regarding a shared vision.
I feel like we have vacillated over the last several
years between mission statements. And I don't know if there
is a single core cohesive.
This is what we're here to do. So my question
is.
Is our goal to provide students with the best possible
education we can an exceptional.
Education as much as we are able.
Using the resources we have available.
Or is there a good enough.
That the board
is hoping we will settle on like is adequate enough.
Or should we be striving for.
Growing and improving.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jen.
Jed. Hi, I'm Jennifer Sard. I am a resident of
south Portland. I am an employee with transportation on an
I am the president of the service employees.
Employees. I wanted to come up to clarify a few
things with the school bus drivers.
School bus drivers work 40 hours a week.
They work anywhere from six 30 or seven in the
morning until four in the afternoon.
They their midday. So they're morning runs and at nine
30.
They do not sit on the clock, getting paid from
nine 30 to one. O'clock.
They have midday trips anywhere as we have 21 bus
drivers.
They do within a week's average 42 to 63.
Midday trips a week that get split between them.
If a driver is out sick on vacation.
Then that means more trips for other drivers to cover.
They also get a one hour lunch break.
During that time, these trips are field trips, mail runs.
It's just, it's different. And I wanted you to understand
that they're not just sitting there.
From nine 30 to one o'clock cause I don't think
that was made clear earlier. Thank you.
Hi, I'm a school bus driver.
My name is Susan Liden Smith. So I'm just gonna
speak on behalf, just kind of back up what Jen
said.
Because in the proposed budget.
They're talking to assign us new duties.
So on behalf of the bus driver is I just
wanna express my serious concerns about the proposal.
To assign drivers to custodial duties.
Such as cafeteria set up and breakdown.
Well, this may be described as a change in working
conditions. It represents a significant change in our job.
Responsibilities and also our physical demands.
Demands bus drives and custodians both play a central role
in our schools.
But they involve very different types of work.
As a bus driver, we are responsible for the safe
transportation of students.
Students which requires constant attention, awareness, and supervision.
That role is fundamentally different from.
Sustained physical labor, which required by a custodian.
This is just not a hypothetical.
Concern. They have already.
Been injuries associated with these tasks.
Tasks, this raises an important question about safety.
Especially for employees who are not hired, are trained to
do this type of work.
We understand the district is facing a difficult budget shortfall.
However, we do not believe this is a safe or
effective solution.
What would be the financial savings? We haven't seen that.
We respectfully asked the board to reconsider this proposal.
Remove it and work collaboratively with the employees and the
union representatives to find solutions.
That will protect both worker safety.
And student safety. Thank you for your time and consideration.
There was a email sent to the board.
I'm not sure if you had a chance to read
it, but it's a little bit more detailed and it'll
explain a little bit more how we feel.
Thank you, Susan. You're welcome.
Hello, my name is Shannon sine. I'm a south Portland
resident and I'm also a licensed clinical social worker in
the community.
I
I hate public speaking. So .
okay. Specific area focus of minus child and adolescent
development for the last six years. I've engaged in direct
practice, alongside continuous research about the implications of the COVID
19 pandemic.
Increasing technology.
And the state of the world on child development.
So tonight, I specifically wanna focus on the social and
emotional implications.
That the reconfiguration model will have on our children and
why the full band model is in their best interest.
The significance, the significance of community has been brought up
by all the board members. And I was so happy
to hear that because that's what I wanted to talk
about.
And I wanted to talk about that from the perspective
of the child, developing mind.
In the world that is rapidly.
Isolating to our children. Their school is the greatest representation
of community.
And when we isolate not at the individual level, but
at the community level.
We know the detriments of going somewhere where everyone is
just like, you.
And something that we need to think about is the
impact that, that has on a child's awareness of self
and others.
The greater rep, the greater representation that the full band
model provides our children with is offers the greatest parts
of a community.
Hopefulness for the future and inclusivity by those who are
different from you.
These are all anecdotes.
Anecdotes, not from my mind, but from work with clients.
Over the years.
Community is seen when the nervous kindergartner.
Sees a cool fourth grader come in and hug that
teacher.
They know that that teacher can be trusted.
They see that one day they'll do the same thing.
It's one of first grader realizes that if they can
be respectful and responsible, they might get to do flag
duty one day. .
Coolest thing ever. It's when a third grader learns how
to be safe in their own body, because they want
nothing more than to go be a book buddy for
a kindergartner. Cool.
We talk about uncertainty a lot. I've heard everyone mention
that. I talk about uncertainty all the time.
And uncertainty is so rattling to our nervous system because
it's when we cannot envision the future that we are
describing.
When we talk about
the future of what the school is going to look
like for our school, for our children, 30 seconds, Shannon.
Excuse me.
30 seconds left. Ah, okay.
The all band model provides opportunities for social-emotional development that
are crucial to our children's future.
It teaches them future mindedness, how to think of others
and themself.
And instills hopefulness for a future in a really uncertain
world.
I think it is the responsibility of the adults in
these children's world to minimize.
Any amount of uncertainty that we can at this time.
That's three minutes there.
Thanks.
Hi, good evening.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name is
Rachel Healy. I'm a sixth grade teacher at the middle
school and the parent of second and fifth graders in
the district.
I also hate public speaking. So I'm gonna pretend you're
all sixth graders. okay.
I'm curious to speak specifically about the proposal to reclassify
director level positions as strategists under a teacher contract.
I appreciate the effort to find solutions that preserve resources
for students.
Students. However, I have concerns about the presentation of this
approach.
I was surprised to hear this shift framed as restoring
teacher positions.
Positions just because the new roles may be on an
S PTA contract does not make them teacher positions in
the way most of us imagine them to be.
I know there has been pressure to reduce more staff
at the administrator level in favor of keeping more teachers.
Teachers. I know these title changes may save some money.
And I believe these roles are important in some form.
But they don't actually save student facing positions.
Positions. Meanwhile, we are cutting teachers who are at the
heart and soul of our schools to name a few,
a teacher who makes it possible for students with disabilities
to participate in sports.
One who makes it possible for students who.
Otherwise can't to access the music program.
A teacher who helps middle school girls.
In all students for that matter love stem class, a
teacher who helps students conquer their fear of math. One
who made fifth grade students feel comfortable as they faced
being middle schoolers. I know this because the students told
me themselves.
This proposal seems to rely on relabeling positions so that
the numbers look better on paper so that the reduction
appears to cut a larger percentage of administrators.
And a smaller percentage of teachers.
Teachers, maybe I'm missing something, but these strategist roles, as
I understand them,
would not involve a direct instruction or regular interaction with
students, but would rather engage in primarily administrative or strategic
duties.
Referring to this move. As restoring multiple teacher positions feels
misleading.
I'm NAR not arguing that these strategist roles should not
exist, but the language being used tonight to describe the
change.
And the portrayal of these positions as teachers.
Teachers misrepresents what is happening and makes it harder for
the community to understand how resources are actually being used.
Thank you. Thank you.
Good evening. My name is Emily Hanes. I'm a resident
of south Portland, a mother of three, and I teach
at Portland high school.
Aside from the logistically unknown, which is essentially everything I
keep thinking about what a potential reconfiguration means to me
personally.
We've made plans for our lives and envisioned a future
for our children.
That is all about to change without a process that
includes real community and family input, logistical planning, or research
to back up why this is the best option for
our kids.
Our neighborhood, our school and the people and families in
it are the village that helps my family survive in
today's society.
As three working as, as working parents with three small
children, we do not have grandparents and siblings nearby.
Our village is our lifeline.
It was not created overnight. It has taken us years
to build.
And at the moment.
When our two oldest are about to attend the same
school, a moment we have long waited for.
Reconfiguration puts them in separate schools and not together.
Not only will important family ties be broken with a
pre-K one.
And two to four model, but our youngest students will
lose the opportunity for mentorship from their older peers.
And how will we stay involved at two or three
schools when we are already stretched so thin?
It feels like our village, which has taken almost a
decade to build is being dismantled by a select few.
In as little as one sweeping yes or no vote
tonight.
Now, multiply that loss by the many hundreds of families
that are elementary school systems serves.
Serves, there has been little to no consideration on the
part of the board or the district to formally take
these important family pieces into consideration.
These schools are the fabric of our communities.
As an educator and someone who has worked with marginalized
youth for the majority of my career, I know that
some of the most important indicators for success are parental
and family involvement in their child's education.
Attendance and schools that offer continuity and stability.
We know that strong community schools create stronger and more
prosperous communities.
We know that fewer transitions contributes to higher achievement.
This move away from the K four model without a
proper and ethical process to plan and execute thought thoughtfully.
Could tear that all away.
I know there's potential for good and reconfiguration, but without
time to understand, time to research best practices without enrollment
studies, without our most basic questions answered. And without more
transparency from you and from the district, it is very
hard to envision what we, what might be ahead and
to get on board with it.
That's where I'm landing right now. And I imagine that
many more are feeling similarly, you have not done the
work to support your argument for reconfiguration. So why should
we.
Blindly trust this choice statements. Like I'm not obligated to
collect data and I will use my own best judgment
to make this choice are dismissive of all of your
constituents, including the ones you're hoping to help most. This
is not leadership.
We need to see the evidence to see the district
in our elected leaders, do the hard work to prove
that this version of recon that's three minutes, reconfiguration is
the right option for us. Do not be hasty. Let's
be thoughtful. Let's be smart and let's collaborate to find
the best path forward. Thank you. Thank you everyone, Emily.
Good evening. My name is Sarah Cohen. First of all, I
wanna thank the school board administration for the time care
and effort you put into this work. I've attended several
of these meetings and I have hesitated to comment.
Part of that comes from the fact that next year
I could potentially have three of my four children in
the same building.
Something I've been genuinely looking forward to as a parent
of a large family.
But I acknowledge that this is one year of many.
Right now our family of six is spread across four
different schools.
I attend SMCC. My oldest is in sixth grade at
the middle school. My middle children are in second and
third grade at small, and I have a child entering
kindergarten next year.
I'm a former teacher, a former homeschool mom.
And I grew up here in south Portland.
Just down the street on McKinley street, I walked to
Dyer.
For six years, I took the bus to Memorial for
three, and I walked to the high school. My mother
worked in the preschool at the community center.
When I reflect on the most formative parts of my
childhood, I think about the sense of neighborhood and community
I had growing up here.
Walking to and from school was part of that, but
so were the deeper connections fostered with the people around
me.
My husband and I met and we had our first
two, two children while living in Boston.
But when it came time to buy a home and
decide where we wanted to put down roots, I wanted
for my children to experience the kind of community I
grew up with.
South Portland is and will be.
So, sorry.
South Portland is and will continue to be a wonderful
place to raise a family because of the people who
make this village.
Our school system is about to change. And truthfully, I
have wavered in what I think is best. And I
just don't know. It is clear that it is disruption
is of the school system is inevitable, but to me,
the timeline and the details of the changes are so
unclear and they are concerning.
I want to assure, share about a morning. I had
last week.
My oldest was having a hard time getting out the
door.
She is struggling in the middle school and she has
a lot of anxiety as many middle schoolers do.
She spends 45 minutes on a very full, very loud
bus each morning.
Which is a hard way to start the day.
When she misses the bus, miss the bus, my husband
offered to give her a ride and drop her off.
When he brought the preschooler, when he needed to leave,
I asked a neighbor to walk my middle kids so
that I could drive her.
She still was not able to go to school. Mm-hmm
well, I have had only incredibly positive interactions with
the middle school staff and the people supporting my child.
It is really hard to get to the bottom of
what's going on. When I have not physically met the
people that are supporting her.
And I've only been able to come to the middle
school a few times a year.
I believe the middle school staff and teachers are doing
their very best to create a positive community for all
students in south Portland, but it is not without its
challenges in growing pains.
Pains. I share all of this because I want to
urge the board in administration to keep in mind that
we are living in what many have called a loneliness
era.
In 2023, the surgeon general, formally declared loneliness and epidemic.
My oldest is, is of the COVID.
Kindergarten era. And my youngest is a COVID baby.
We are a world longing for close communities, but don't
know how to build them.
Creating new school structures and communities takes time and effort
and it will require community support and buy-in to be
successful.
30 seconds left. I've been in many conversations with other
parents whose childrens might be in two different buildings next
year.
We are putting our minds together to think of creative
ways to help our children get to school safely and
together through all of main seasons.
Seasons, we are prepared to rally and do what is
best for our community.
But it takes time. I urge the board to wait
on the decision to reconfigure our elementary schools.
And put the time and thought into this process while
getting the greater community on board. Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Hi, my name is Chelsea smirky.
I have just a couple questions.
Questions what's presented tonight.
The staff reductions, closing a school.
And reconfiguration does that completely eliminate the $8.4 million?
Are we still looking to add more to that?
I'm having a hard time understanding how option a or
option B.
Is increasing equity in any of our schools without increasing
busing.
Right now you have a pre-K through one and a
two through four school.
To the east and a and two on the west.
So we're thinking in our minds where we're trying to
figure out where our kids are going, we're gonna be
going to the closest schools.
So would all of the kids.
In the brown, small districts still be going to brown
and small.
And kids on the other side, be going to dire
and skilling. How does that improve the equity?
Without increasing busing.
Also
if option a is chosen, how does that affect the
U I S program that's offered in the summer for
six weeks.
To the special education kids.
That really utilize that program to keep.
Their structure that they've learned throughout this throughout the school
year.
How does that get affected? If everything is in motion
over the summer.
And then talking about the portables at small school, if
that is going to be a pre-K through one building,
we've heard that a portable is not.
Ideal. You're probably thinking of putting the first graders in
there as they're the oldest.
You're looking at a bigger class size in first grade.
I can't remember if it was 22 or 24 kids.
And you're reducing the instructional.
Support what happens if someone needs to go to the
bathroom?
And how do they get into the building? Is there
a key card? What does that actually look like?
And how is that the best option?
Thank you. Thank you.
Hello board members. My name is Matthew Emory, and I
am a student at Seth Portland middle school.
I'm here to talk to you today about the computer
science teacher at the middle school.
I heard that you all are thinking of cutting him.
I know as a board, you need to make hard
choices.
But I assure you, this is one job you shouldn't
cut.
This teacher is not just one that goes through the
motions.
Motions the computer science teacher makes his teaching his own
and makes learning fun for his students.
Students, the students love him. You can see him in
the hallways talking to students in the high fiving them.
We have all the equipment.
This situation is like building a zoo exhibit buying the
animals, but not hiring a zookeeper. .
I don't see how we can or.
Our generation needs education on technology.
Because it is progressing at such a high rate, and
I wouldn't want to be taught by anyone other than
Mr. Wetzel.
And in regards to the percussion at deck is as
insane that we are still considering cutting him.
With rising class sizes band teachers cannot focus on the
entire class.
This action could heavily affect the music program.
Because if we do not have him, then I ask
the question.
Who will teach the percussion.
These cuts also seem heavily.
Unfair to the related arts teachers and special ed teachers.
Teachers, I would argue that the related arts teachers are
more important.
Because most students won't grow up to be mathematicians or
scientists. The majority will be coders.
Firemen repair people, cooks politicians or anything they want.
Most kids aren't interested in science or math.
They're interested in band art or singing.
I've never once heard a kid in.
Gym class say, I wish I could be in science
right now. .
I urge you not to cut these positions. I've talked
about thank you for your time. Thank you, Matt. Good
job.
Hi, good evening. My name is Melissa Hansen and I am
a resident of south Portland for the last 16 years.
I ha I'm the stepmom of a south Portland high
school alumni. And I have a daughter that's in ninth
grade.
My daughter, Maddie could not be here tonight because she
is a.
Very gifted three sport athlete. So she has asked me
to read a statement for her.
My name is Madeline Hansen and I'm a freshman at
south Portland high school.
I had been a student in the south Portland school
department for my entire life.
I'm a three sport athlete and have consistently performed well
academically.
I attribute much of my success within the school system
to one particular teacher at south Portland, middle school.
This teacher has continuously supported me.
And challenged me to grow in all aspects of my
life.
Although I am no longer their student.
They continue to offer guidance and encouragement.
They are one of the most compassionate and dedicated individuals
I have ever met.
In their REA in their relatively short time in the
district, they have made an extraordinary impact accomplishing more than
teachers have, who have been here for decades.
They started a unified basketball team, taught numerous physical education
classes for students who need additional support and was always
there for students when others were not.
Did you take any of this into consideration when making
cuts? If not, then I strongly urge you to reevaluate
the process in which these decisions are made, because I
think you tend to forget the implications your choices have
on not only teachers, but students as well.
Have you ever thought about the effect that these changes
have on children?
I know from personal experience that frequent change can impact
trust and stability.
And I am just one student among many.
Imagine how many mental health issues affect students because of
all of these changes, middle school is already a very
tough time for kids.
So why are you making it harder by taking away
their support systems?
Why are you cutting positions that directly speak to students?
What about administrative positions? They make much more annually than
teachers.
Teachers. So why aren't you cutting them? People have asked
these questions over and over again. And have you answered
them or done anything about it at the end of
the day?
These decisions are not just numbers on a spreadsheet.
They are people not positions. They are mentors. And the
support system students rely on every single day.
I encourage you to think about the real impact of
your choices and to practice as you preach by putting
students first. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Melissa.
Connie.
Hi, good evening. My name is Connie DeSanto.
DeSanto and I live in south Portland.
I work for the school district.
And tonight I am speaking as president of S P
E S P a, which is our.
Support staff union.
A is deeply
disappointed at how rushed this budget process has been.
Especially in light of everything that happened just a year
ago.
It's hard to believe that we are here again.
It also feels like some very big and drastic changes
have been made without a real opportunity for public discussion
and debate.
SSPA members.
Need to know that this board is being intentional when
it chooses which elementary school to close.
If a school must close.
We encourage the board to choose which school to close.
Based on what school would CLO.
Excuse me, based on what would save the most money.
And in doing so save the most student facing.
Positions SSPA members.
Also need to know that this board did everything in
its power to save as many student facing positions as
it could.
Right now the employees of this district do not believe
that is the case.
In the last two weeks, I have attended several meetings
with staff whose positions will be eliminated. If this budget
passes.
Passes. Those conversations were not just hard. Many were devastating.
And what I've been struck by is the number of
times I've heard.
What's going to happen to my kids.
I've also heard a great deal of feedback and worry
about the number of S P T a positions being
eliminated and how that will affect the work employees in
my union. Perform.
We have reduced four.
Instructional support teaching positions with no additional plan for all
of the students. They support.
Are we no longer
providing intentional instructional.
Support in this district are students now going from struggling
in general ed settings, straight to special ed referrals.
Referrals. We already have 23% of our entire student.
Population receiving special ed services.
Services and this budget proposes.
Proposes reducing the number of providers for those students.
Students less case managers.
Managers less occupational therapists.
30 seconds, less support staff.
Less guidance counselors.
And reducing the only
general ed behavior strategist in the entire district.
Chris darling. I yield my time.
We have no other general ed behavior strategist for the
whole district.
Yet we have proposed to reduce.
The one we do have.
Teachers have approached me with concerns about the district's decision
to eliminate all of our EdTech ones and lunch aids.
Aides employees who provide critical support and student supervision.
I understand a strong majority of those surveyed in the
teacher's unit.
Feel too many support staff positions have been eliminated.
I know you received the results.
Meanwhile, there have been no meaningful cuts at the top.
Shifts without changes to our bottom line. Aren't real changes.
Changes SSPA joins our other two staff unions in expressing
shock.
That so few central office and administrative positions were reduced.
So here I am again.
At the podium, confused about why we are reducing lunch
aids.
Ed tech one S
teachers and clerks.
Clerks that will have serious impacts on our students.
Students when we are still sitting with redundancies in administration.
That never or rarely interact with our students.
Students to the point of making decisions.
Decisions like reducing a position with the only teacher.
Who teaches intro to robotics.
Robotics at the high school where we have a robotics
team that just last year was invited to a world
championship competition.
And was on this stage to celebrate being in the
top.
3% of the world.
Those are the types of decision decisions we're making with
this proposal.
So I am showing you some really big disconnects.
Disconnects, please listen, please do not vote to pass this
budget the way it's currently written.
Thank you for your time. Thank you, Colleen.
Hi, my name is CAS I'm first grade at.
Small school and
and I live
at 16 grand street.
Oh, Cass really loves his school and he just wanted
to share that. Oh,
my name is Meredith diamond resident.
Educator parent.
And as an educator, I think it's really important to
let the student work, tell the story. Adults can talk
all day about what's happening in the classroom, but looking
at student work as where you see.
What kind of reality is actualizing. So like member Richardson,
I was really excited to see a slide about achievement
data tonight, but I do not think that we have
given it the attention to understand the story that it's
actually telling.
So if we look at.
That as a juxtaposition of a year before inequity initiative
and a year after an equity initiative.
We see really dramatic effects.
So in 2024.
Skillings achievement level.
Meeting the standard was 39.31%.
Kayla was 48.61%.
And small was 64.59%.
But with the implementation of an equity initiative in one
year.
One year.
We saw an increase in Calor of.
12.8, 3%.
And an increase at, at skilling of.
9.7, 9% in that same window.
Smalls achievement fell by 4.6899999999999995%.
So, if we look at the gap that existed in
2024, we're looking at.
15.9, 8% at Caler and 25.28% at skill.
Skilling, but post equity initiative.
That gap has narrowed to 1.5%.
And 7.76%.
I mean, talk about a positive impact.
Of an intentional move.
Driven by a desire and a commitment for equity.
I have not met a parent or teacher in this
district.
Who doesn't believe in equity for all students.
Students, I feel so lucky to be in a community
where this commitment is unequivocal.
But what I'm disturbed by is the new story that
somehow our last minute school closure and reconfiguration is an
equity initiative.
The primary audience for this comment is anyone who is
thinking about reconfiguration as an equity initiative.
We keep using the, the term equity, but we haven't
really identified it. What is educational equity? It is the
principle of ensuring. Every individual student has access Mary to
the specific resources, opportunity and support. They need to reach
their full academic and social pat potential the needs of
a.
First grader from a newcomer family with limited language and
without stable housing will not be met simply because there
are more kids with fewer challenges in the classroom.
Making rosters more racially, socioeconomically and linguistically diverse by increasing
class size does not increase equity.
But that's the extent
of what we're talking about here.
What actually
three minutes. Thank you.
Sam diamond Meredith got my time.
What things increase equity.
Curriculum resources personalized.
For the populations with the highest needs.
Culturally responsive pedagogy and the PD.
Time that it takes to understand what culturally responsive pedagogy
looks like.
Differentiated instruction in the instruct in the structural supports to
make that feasible at scale.
Data-driven resource allocation, designed to close achievement gaps.
Gaps, but we know this already. We don't have to
look any further than our own elementary achievement levels.
To see what happens when equity truly is the driving
goal.
But the true story is that closing a school and
raising class sizes is an antiquity decision.
If the negative
impacts of this antiquity move are to be mitigated. Then
it must be through a strategic and data-driven process.
That invests in proven methods for closing achievement and opportunity
gaps.
Gaps, but efforts like these aren't being talked about.
Please don't treat equity. Like something that can be achieved.
Achieved without investment proportionate to the need.
Please ask for help from city council before making these
decisions.
Decisions. Thank you. Thank you.
Hi, I am bill Newton, parent of a skill in
kindergartner and a two-year-old since my family is at the
beginning of our school journey.
My thoughts lean more towards the long-term health of the
school district.
First, I want to thank Abigail for the overview of
how the district got here last week.
It was helpful seeing all of the underlying problems to
understand how the districts up a little bit to yourself
too. Thank you.
Yeah, to understand how the districts got into its current
financial situation. And I appreciate our honesty about the difficult
multi-year path forward.
Please stay.
currently, the district wants to do three distinct items
within this budget cycle.
Reconfiguring the grade bands closing a school and having a
balanced budget. These are all separate items.
They do not all need to happen at the same
time. They certainly don't need to happen tonight.
Overall, I'm shocked at what I have heard tonight.
I've heard board members say they're confused. The process is
rushed and members seem to be speaking as if there
are no alternative choices.
And something they don't fully understand.
Needs to happen. You always have choices.
You may be surprised you don't have to present a
budget to the city council on April 7th. If you're not
done by then.
Keep going artificial timelines are just that artificial.
Reviewing the history of the push towards reconfiguration. I saw
one of the recommendations of the boundaries and configuration steering
committee that was board approved in may of 2004. That
was.
The district shall conduct an analysis of attendant zone and
viable elementary grade level configurations with guidance from a consultant
selected by a committee to include the superintendent two board
members.
And two residents approved by the board with findings of
this analysis presented to the board in a public workshop.
By January 30th, 2025.
This board approved study with a deadline of over a
year ago. Still hasn't been done.
At this point, I believe the board would be negligent
and pursuing any new configuration options without performing the study.
Without understanding what the best configurations are for their elementary
schools. I don't think a school should be closed.
It would introduce change for change's sake.
This leads to the question of how to balance the
budget. One of the biggest issues is that with higher
percentages of ESOL and special needs students, it's simply costs
more to run the school district than it used to,
to meet student needs.
Closing the school will save the district around $400,000.
That is one half of 1% of the school budget.
This is not a reason to close a school. It
has been suggested 30 seconds left, not closing a school
would require eliminating 12 to 16 more positions.
Positions. I don't think we should be making more reductions
in staff.
Especially student facing positions.
Positions, I would increase our proposed budget by that $400,000
to not further cut staff.
This would get the district to a 6.6, 9% increase
to the taxpayers this year.
The current school budget increases the tax burden to the.
Average home by $257.
An additional $400,000 would increase the DAC tax burden.
To 200 E $7. That's three minutes.
Colin glass. I yield my time.
That $30 per home would go a long way in
allowing the district to properly set itself up for the
future.
Last week it was presented that.
The proposed increase in the total city property tax burden
is 5.1%.
Which is already breaking through the psychological barrier of 5%.
The additional 400,000 would increase this amount to 5.5%.
As we all know.
When you've dug yourself a hole, the first step is
to stop, stop digging, trying to do all three of
these proposals in one budget cycle feels like using the
shovel as a catapult to get you out of the
hole.
Please don't let Pryor mismanagement of the district's finances lead
to more poor decisions for the future.
I know at this point, I couldn't support the proposed
budget on June 19th, June 9th.
You may have spent a lot of time on this,
but from the comments I've heard proposals that have been
made and specific examples from the public.
That indicates you haven't done the work.
Please do better for our students.
Students. Thank you. Thank you, bill.
Hi, my name is Kara krek. I'm a seventh and
eighth grade English, just speakers of other languages teacher.
I wanted to first thank the board members who said
that they would favor a reconfiguration plan and express my
disappointment in.
The board members who are voting against that at that
time, at this time.
And also with some considerations for them and community members.
To potentially change their minds.
Minds. I definitely hear the support for larger grade bands
and fewer transitions for students.
Students. I actually grew up in another state and I,
my school was kindergarten through sixth grade and I think
that was really good for me in a lot of
ways. But.
The demographics of where I grew up were also really
different than the demographics of south Portland. I think in
my entire elementary school career, we had one.
Newcomer English learner.
That I'm aware of in my grade.
I also was never in a class with probably fewer
than 25 kids.
There's just more and more people where I grew up.
And I hear the fear about transitions and I just
would want to offer.
At the risk of having people feeling like I'm calling
them privileged, just to have some perspective for everyone who
lives in the south Portland community, many of our students
have had.
Transitions, not just from a school in the same town,
with the same community, traveling with them, but across continents,
countries, languages, cultures.
Cultures and
major world events.
Events. So I feel like these config reconfiguration and equity
concerns have been brought up for years, at least in
the six years I've worked here.
And I've heard so many times people say they care,
but it's not the time yet. It's not the time
now.
And I again, would just ask people to examine.
If not now when it's really only one more transition.
If a student is going to a private pre-K, they're
already transitioning into.
A new school for kindergarten and first grade, I think
people have also talked to the potential positives of transitions.
As adults, it's really easy for us to say, oh,
three years is such a short amount of time, but
if you're nine years old, that's a third of your
life. Time feels a lot longer when you are young.
I really don't think that continuing to put off this
decision.
Is supporting our students.
As the board chair said, moving. If Kayla is closed
and more students are moved to skilling, that will actually
exacerbate the equity problems and kick it farther down the
line for then another divisive transition.
More transitions. If we were to do reconfiguration in about
a year for those Kor students who have already had
to move.
Abby Anderson.
S P T a VP. I yield my time to
Kara.
As an ESOL teacher. I also wanna talk a little
bit about the academic.
Outcomes data that was shared. The only data that was
shared was from the state NWA tests.
Which for math, all students are required to take.
I have literally had to Proctor that test for students
where it is their first day in the country. And
they are taking that math test. All that data tells
me is which schools have the most multilingual learners because
they do not, they cannot show what they can do.
On those tests. Imagine
walking into a school and being presented with a math
test in Arabic.
You probably would not be able to show them math
that you can do.
So please do not use that reading.
Their exempt for one year from arrival in the us.
But still again, to acquire grade level.
Like the academic language to be able to read at
grade level within one year is.
Would be impressive.
Not to mention many of our multilingual students come from.
Backgrounds where they've had limited access to education.
In their home language.
If you really want to use data.
And analyze the success of all of our students. I
would really encourage to have access.
Testing data, which is the English testing. How many students
at each school are exiting ML services every year.
And which elementary schools have the most students to go
on to achieve the seal of biliteracy in high school.
And not to erase their achievement or see them only
as a negative as they are shown in those NWA
data.
I really think that
we can, this is the time for reconfiguration. I understand
that it's divisive.
But I think that the board has the opportunity to
really be community leaders. I think that if everyone were
to come together and champion this.
And really
work to show the community that it's the right thing.
For all students that
I mean, I feel like that's what happened with the
middle school. I started at Memorial.
And the middle school transition was great. I don't know
that. I know that we don't have as much time,
but I do hear.
The superintendent's office saying it can be done.
And I really think this is a chance for.
Yeah, the board to take a stand for equity and
have actual leadership to.
Not just decide on what's being presented to them, but
to take a stand and like be leaders in the
community for that work.
I am skeptical when people say.
You know, I support equity, but not yet. That is.
A delay and that is.
More time when I was talking to a parent who
the slip has a student at one of our elementary
schools.
With less need where her student who does not have
a high need, gets to work with a math specialist.
And at other elementary schools, there are kids waiting for
years for that.
There are kids in ESOL lessons with three lessons happening
in one room.
So when people say just mixing kids up isn't equity,
it's not, but having space so that they can each
have their own classroom for a lesson.
And actually hear what they're doing. That that is, that
is six minutes. Thank you.
Hello, Amy Haskins. I'm a parent.
This is very challenging. You've heard from me before. So
I'll be brief. You've also heard from many other parents,
students, teachers, and the entire music department about how important
the percussion ed tech position is to the instrumental music
program in south Portland.
And yet the district leadership creates a dedicated slide.
To explain that they are continuing to cut this position.
I found it a little crazy, actually that level of
targeted intensity.
A whole slide to show how they dug in their
heels on this.
And publicly say that our support of the percussion ed
tech is not particularly special or important.
I know through conversations that the majority of board members.
Support the percussion ed tech, going back in.
I'm sure that you may also think that the district
leadership's inability to compromise to be responsive on this position
is strange and misguided.
The only ones who can make them return it to
the budget is you.
The only ones who can really tell them what todo.
Is you it's clear the principles in the district leadership
will not be flexible on this, on their own.
So it's in your hands. I'm asking for the board
to tell the district recurrent return, the percussion instructor.
Back to the budget. Thank you, Amy.
Good evening, Nate Spence, Stanford street. Thank you for the
time.
We're all grieving loss, potential loss of school of beloved
staff of employment.
We are losing a lot and we're right to grieve
and process that loss.
But the decision before the board can't be based in
grief or emotion or personal opinion.
We expect our school district and our school board to
make rational and strategic decisions based on research and planning.
A tragedy of our current predicament is that a majority
of parents support change that creates more equity and better
outcomes.
Outcomes Dr. Prince shared some data earlier that reconfirms, what
we all already know. We have uneven outcomes across our
schools. Yes.
The question is what's the best way to address it.
And that answer has to be based in research and
supported by due diligence and proper planning.
The boundaries and configurations work while valuable was not research
and planning.
Nothing shared today was research or planning.
There are trade-offs to every decision we make.
We don't actually understand the trade-offs we're making here.
Because we haven't done the work.
Since you can't show research, we have to do our
own research on grade band models is highly inconclusive.
The only thing that seems clear is that continuity and
proximity are highly correlated with better outcomes. Why.
Because trans transition set kids back in continuity and proximity
make for more involved families.
And communities, siblings stay together longer. Kids are more likely
to go to school.
Older kids role model for younger kids.
Community schools make stronger communities.
When we've pressed for the supporting research, the responses were
not obligated to do that.
When we've pressed on whether or not we've formally engaged
teachers, families, and community in such significant change, the response
is we're not obligated to do that.
When press that doing the due diligence and having the
details is an important part of making a good decision.
The response is we're not obligated to do that. So
we're not obligated to make good decisions.
Decisions every south Portlander should be deeply.
Disturbed by this attitude, cuz this is out of character
for this city.
There are so many examples where these things are fundamental
to how this city operates.
Operates the comprehensive plan, climate resilience, the middle school project,
the Mahoney site.
We know how to do this, but in this instance,
where we're all where we're talking about a complete overhaul
of our elementary schools. Our youngest students were not up
for it.
We should reject this attitude.
All south Portland families deserve better.
Take the time to make sure we're doing the right
thing and then we do it and then do it
well.
Rushed unresearched change leads to chaos, and that's what we're
signing up for. If we move forward with option a
for the next school year.
Unintended consequences are what happened when you don't properly plan.
This is a difficult situation. No doubt. There are no
good options. Only less bad ones. We need clear headed
decisions more than ever. Thank you.
Thank you, Nate.
Hello, my name is Hannah Schultz. I'm a part-time art teacher
and part-time ed tech at south Portland high school.
And this is the second year in a row that
I've been the victim of layoffs due to budget cuts
by this district.
During the 24 25 school year, I was working in the
library at skill and as an ed tech, when the
budget cuts came.
And I received an impersonal email notifying me that my
position was eliminated.
It felt awful. I had spent the last two years
at skilling taking on various roles in an effort to
build up my experience and become more competitive in the
job market.
As art teacher openings are few and far between and
the candidate pool is competitive.
I have spent the last three years applying for dozens
of openings and attending many nerve-wracking interviews.
Interviews all without a job offer, I had at least
found comfort in finding a home among the truly special
school community of skill with a job I loved while
I continued my search.
But then that was taken away from me.
And the weeks following a full-time art teacher position became
available at the high school.
I thought this is my opportunity.
I've done some really great work in the district to
prove myself as a skilled educator.
And a flexible team member and I'm qualified for this
role.
Then that position was not offered to me.
Then days after the school year began, I was offered
a one year only position as a part-time art teacher
at the high school.
With little information about the role. I was given hours
to accept the position before it was presented to the
board that day.
I felt like an afterthought and to be offered this
temporary role after not being chosen for the full-time position,
felt demoralizing.
But I was told that the art teacher position would
likely be made a full-time position.
Next year. And I figured this is my only opportunity
to get closer to my goal. So I took it.
Now I find my G. Now I find myself once
again.
Disrespected and disregarded by this district.
Tabby position eliminated.
Once was hard enough.
Tablet occurs. Second time feels cruel.
For the past three years, I have been tossed around.
From one temporary position to the next, in this district.
Without job security or financial stability.
All while the non student facing positions at the top
remain intact.
This is not equitable. And I'm tired of hearing how
these decisions are in no way, a reflection of my
dedication to the school and the students.
Students words only go so far.
This year, I've absolutely fallen in love with teaching art
at the high school level. And I have formed so
many meaningful relationships with the students I work with.
On a daily basis. I get to see 30 seconds
left.
The impact I have in their lives. And that fills
me with so much joy and purpose.
Christine Dobson. I yield my time to Hannah.
Art and education is incredibly important and impactful for students.
Students creating art is truly what makes us human.
Is the most powerful form of self-expression we have, it
helps us understand the world and our role in it.
It has the power to transcend the boundaries of language
and culture and to evoke emotions that allow us insight
into the perspective of others.
I have students in my class.
Classes who do not speak any English, but who are
able to engage in the material anyway, because it is
visual. It's accessible.
It connects us all.
Engaging in art reduces stress increases self-esteem and it can
provide a sense of purpose and belonging.
And you don't have to be good at it to
gain those benefits.
Benefits art class is a special place where you know
that if you genuinely try your best.
You cannot fail, no matter the final product or outcome.
There is no right answer.
Creating art allows us to let go of the need
for, for perfectionism.
And to slow down and enjoy engaging in the process.
To strip students of their access to art is to
strip them of their humanity and their self-expression. So I'm
asking you to please consider nine eliminating an art teacher
position at the high school.
If the goal of this district and of the school
board is to do what is right and best for
the students.
Students, I think you need to reexamine the position cuts
that are on the table.
I can only give my personal perspective.
But I know I'm merely one of many hardworking.
Beloved educators who are making a daily difference in the
life of their students.
Students and who are now faced with losing their jobs
and being torn away from their school communities.
I can only fathom the impact this will have on
students, but when many are losing access to a trusted
support system or a favorite class or a creative outlet
or a meaningful relationship.
It can't be positive. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay. My name is Jamie Watson. I'm a PE teacher
and health teacher at.
Almost said Memorial, but at the middle school,
I'm reading on behalf of Kate Porter on Wednesday, March 18th,
about 70 colleagues in the south Portland school department received
emails that would alter their lives and our students' lives.
And on Thursday, March 19th, I spoke to impact impacted staff
at the middle school level.
Being laid off during uncertain times is extremely destabilizing for
teachers and their families.
I experience a, my, my, of emotions. As I listen
to teachers, ask questions about how they were going to
shift teaching practices to a different grade span. Others wondered
what their futures may hold the impact of losing benefits
and what their options are now that they have to
move on from when the job that they love and
the students that they serve.
I listen to teachers who have spent countless hours finding
funding to generate new learning experiences in their classrooms.
Classrooms teachers who have made a difference for our students
who are new to the country.
And setting them up for success when they enter high
school and beyond.
Teachers who have helped kids become stronger in math and
reading.
Students with creative and innovative lessons that would teach them
in a way that their research and experiences has taught
them would be best for those who struggle with basic
skills.
Teachers who have developed unified programs so that all of
our students are included in a team experiences.
Experience teachers who have added valuable experience to our youngest
students as they enter the middle school, I could go
on and on, but there are two glaring things that
remain constant as the week unfolded. The first with that,
these educators remain professional, caring and most concerned about what
loss the, their POS positions would have on their students
and their colleagues. The primary focus.
Was on others rather than their own impactful career change.
As the week ended and slides, the budget presentation were
shared with staff members.
The other constant became obvious to me and others. The
huge impacts on some areas of the soap post school
department, while others remained largely the same while the S
P T a has worked closely with admin during this
process, understanding and trusting the, that we are all in
the funding, financial crisis together. We believe that our district,
which holds a lot of emphasis on.
Equity would be well equitable in loss of these positions.
Positions what? Sorry. We trusted that, that those in the
room understood that there are several interpretations of the definition
of the word equitable. The proposed cuts do not feel
equitable.
I have deep respect for the administrators, specialists and directors
in our district. But if we in are indeed in
all part of the current financial crisis in SoPo, then
all levels of the school department should share this burden
as well. Shifts and move in central office are not
equitable to position cuts for those in individuals who are
working close.
With our students each day.
And now I'm gonna read my own.
Jeanie Swenson. I teach at the middle school. I give
my minutes to Jamie.
I first wanna just say that. Had I known this
was gonna happen to me twice in my teaching career
at south Portland of being cut.
I would pick south Portland over again. I've been here
22 years.
And I can say that confidently, both as a teacher
and an athletics liaison at our middle school.
I'm also jealous that the percussionist got a slide and
the PE teachers did not, but I'm gonna let that
slide today.
I echo everything that Rachel Healy said about moving
directors to strategists on the S PTA contracts. So if
you wanna put a star by that, I won't rehash
those points out.
As a parent, I'm not sure how I could have
managed two different schools with the time that I was
given to south Portland. When my kids were in elementary
school.
As a working parent, I was part of a parent
group where we helped each other out at pickup times.
And I feel like some of our parents and other
community members are going to need that as well.
I'm gonna approach this a little bit differently instead of
talking about positions that should be cut as far as
line items that maybe we should look at.
And reducing. So I just wanna say the Taylor line
item for materials was listed at $25,675, which is now
reduced to zero.
We have increased our materials at all schools by over
$25,000.
Line items to question due to high increase, you have
these in your email.
Line 51. We're going from 29,800 to 61,200.
That's an increase of $31,400 for supplies and materials at
brown.
Line 1 0 6 30 3000 to 59,000. An increase of $26,100 for
supplies and materials at Dyer.
Line two 15, we're going from 41,875 to 74,374.
An increase of $32,000.
For supplies and materials at skilling.
Line 2 71, we're going from $26,780.
To 56,600.
An increase of 29,800 for supplies and materials at small.
It's small line 2 88 are going from 85,200 to $161,480.
An increase of $76,210 for stipends at SPMS.
SPMS line 3 34, we're going from 203,000.
To 258,000 an increase of 54,000, almost 55,000 for supplies
and materials at SPMS.
SPMS line 6 63, we're going from 58,000 to 74,000. An
increase of 16,000 for supplies and materials.
Materials line 1679. We're going from 30,000 to $121,968.
An increase of $91,068 for teacher salaries. I can't remember
what that's for, but it's not just.
Teachers like in front of people. I, that I can
tell 30 seconds line 1778.
This is the 240,000 that we talked about earlier. I'm
just wondering how much money we've already paid.
To people attending IEP since our new contract has been
implemented, that'd be a great number to have and see
if 240 is too high.
Line 2 23, 20, 20,000.
To 56,000 for assessment supplies and services line 2 56 from
69,000 to 85,000 line 2, 5 36 from twenty eight, three hundred and fifty to 62,000 for
stipends at this assistance superintendent off. Thank you, James. Jamie
that's six minutes.
Good evening. I'm Jen Fletcher. I'm a related arts teacher
at south Portland middle school. I have a few questions
just to start. I'd like to know what rationale guided
the selection of POS positions for elimination and what data
inform.
Informed these decisions were department leaders, particularly in the related
arts areas consulted about the potential impact.
Before these cuts were proposed since they are the ones
best positioned to speak on how these changes would directly
impact students in their content area.
And will the board take the time needed to examine
every line of this budget with care?
Ensuring it truly serves the students to the fullest extent
possible. Even if it doesn't align with your timeline.
You asked for new ideas or thoughts. And to be
perfectly honest, I was not planning to speak tonight, but
after hearing the response, given to board member fellows regarding
the percussion position, I believe the information I have to
share qualifies is new.
There are not many people in this district that can
do what I do as a band director. And it
is true that with, without percussion instructor, it would just
be the one band teacher in the room.
However, that is not what we are concerned about. We
are concerned that we are losing a position that is
directly instructing 50 plus students on a daily basis.
You were told that surrounding districts use the one teacher
model for band and that's frankly, inaccurate cap, Elizabeth schools
have a contracted percussion instructor. Who's paid through their district.
Scarborough school's employee of percussion instructor on a 0.75 teaching
salary.
At a cost significantly higher than a full-time ed tech
position.
And Westbrook schools no longer maintain a dedicated percussion instructor
role.
Because they decided to employ a full-time band director who
splits time between their middle school and high school. And
co-teaches their band settings.
Settings, this model is significantly more expensive than a full-time
ed tech position.
And to put this in perspective, our middle school band
program as 125 more students in the Westbrook middle school
program.
It was mentioned that reducing class size could be a
workaround. This year, I have 145, fifth graders and four
blocks to teach them all two on red days, two
on white days.
And that works out to a minimum of 35 students
per class. This is already about 10 over what is
considered to be the RA class size cap. I do
this because I stand by the fact that every child
should have the chance to learn an instrument in fifth
grade. I'm not sure who would be the one to
tell a 10 year old, the, they can't part participate
in band because they didn't make the roster cut.
But it certainly won't be me.
My band room has an open invite to all of
you.
Board members, administrators, directors, the more the merrier.
Come spend 45 minutes in the band room and you'll
see firsthand how we utilize this ed tech role in
our rooms and how vital it is to the success
of our program and our students.
Students I'd like to finish by touching on the S
PSD goals that were shared with you on slide 12.
Goal number one calls for a 3% increase in the
number of students with an attendance rate of 90% or
higher.
Goal two states, we aim to increase the number of
students who report a sense of belonging at school. By
5%. It's deeply concerning that this proposed budget eliminates positions.
That for many students are the very reason. They feel
a sense of belonging in the first place and are
the very reasons some students to choose to come to
school each day, I urge the board to look beyond
the slides and overarching numbers being.
Presented when you do, you will see the students who
will directly feel the impact of the loss of these
student facing positions. You'll find educators who will take uneven
more.
Responsibility as they try to hold things together with blue
tape and paperclips, and you'll see you community parents, alumni,
and current, and retired educator students, and more willing to
stand up and be heard even when they're essentially told
to stand down.
Erica Serrano middle school band.
I yield my time. If these decisions and proposals undermine
the very goals that we claim to value as a
school department, then we need to ask ourselves.
What are we really prioritizing? And at whose expense, thank
you.
Thank you.
Hi, my name's Catherine. I'm a mother of three boys
in south Portland. I have a first grader, a third
grader and an, a young one that will be entering
kindergarten.
I recognize the weight of what you're being asked to
do.
That said I have a concern.
The decision in front of you is enormous with longstanding
implications.
For students and families in this community. And I question
whether it is fair for a small group to carry
the weight on behalf of the entire city.
There is also a clear gap of representation.
Particularly in those most impacted, including the underrepresented.
And under sourced communities. I cannot assume we know what
is best without giving them a voice of giving them
voices.
Their voices. Sorry. direct. Say.
Because of that, I strongly urge the city council to
call a special referendum as soon as possible and allow
voters to weigh indirectly on this options that are being
considered.
If we are truly committed to supporting.
Underrepresented and under-resourced communities.
Then this is the most fair and inclusive, inclusive step
forward.
If equality is the goal, then inclusion in the decision
making process has to be one.
Has to be the standard. And lastly, I would like
to just say that while of course I care about
academic achievement.
To be quite honest, I care more about the mental
health of our young children.
And then I do about their test scores. Test scores
are not reflective of a child's level of intelligence.
I as a mother care more about their characteristics that
are not measured by a test.
Are they empathetic? Are they kind, are they resilient? Are
they hardworking? Are we raising good humans?
As of now at this moment, the answer is yes.
And our neighborhood schools and communities play a vital role
in that.
This community is rare and sacred.
People seek it out, this kind of community.
Is hard to find let's hold onto it.
And I also just wanna say on behalf of the
young child's mental state,
I'm sure there are parents who have kids who are
highly sensitive children, the orchid children.
Who need special watering and certain light to grow and
foster.
And those kids will not thrive.
In a community where they're uprooted every couple of years.
And they're so supported. I love my school and my
teachers.
Teachers so much. And my children do and they feel
safe and supported.
And I just left that.
Is so important.
To honor the weight of the young child's mental health
in this process.
Thank you, Jenny.
Hi.
Jenny Luka. I have a kindergartner second grader and a
fourth grader. I'm a south Portland resident.
My, I just have some questions that I'm gonna throw
out there. And the first one is who writes down
community questions right now. It used to be Tim Matheny
and he did a really good job. I think of
writing down all the questions and then addressing them.
I'm up to 12 questions right now that community members
have asked. And I hope that we're going to go
back and answer those questions.
Questions, one question that I have that I would very
much like to see addressed or hear addressed tonight.
Is, it was pointed out that there would be a
23% reduction in the administrative.
Unit. And I was just wondering, from my perspective, it's
not a total reduction.
Because those positions have been turned into other positions.
Positions and from the teacher in ed tech position.
The teacher in ed tech positions that have been reduced.
How many of those percentage-wise.
Have just been turned into other positions for that question.
Makes sense. Cause I don't think we can really call
it a 23% reduction in unit.
If those people still have jobs and just have a
different title. And I think that the, the title is
really important.
I noticed that on March 23rd, the director of nutrition and
the director of facilities were both list, both listed as
director positions in our district.
But they were not represented tonight in the current director
level. So I'm also curious are those director positions we
have here director of nutrition and facilities, or are they
not? That's a big deal because that means we either
currently have 13 director positions in administration, or we currently
have 50 15 director of levels in administration.
And the difference in that from a student ratio, just
so you understand is.
13 would be 211 students to one administrator and 15
would be 180.
Three to one. I think I did that backwards, but
you get it.
Someone earlier talked about Gorum and how it's $20,000 per
pupil.
The reason Gorm is $20,000 per pupil is cuz they
have 10 directors in their central office. I'm not saying
that's the only reason.
But there are some statistics we can find out there
that are really gonna show us kind of what's going
on. And I'd love for us to look more at
them.
As far as the decision you guys have to make
about reconfiguration or K through four. I'm so sorry. It
is so hard. And I don't know what you're gonna
do. I, for one.
My heart just at this point breaks for the killer
parents. And I was wondering if we could take into
account what those caregivers want to do. Do they want
their siblings together of their children?
Or do they want friends and grade level together and
Kun, we ask them and have them be a part
of this conversation.
I also feel the need to say, or to echo
what people have said about.
Asking city council for more money.
Echoing what's previously been said, let's make a long-term plan.
About one school, which is true equity.
And, and move toward that goal. Thank you.
Thank you, Jenny.
Hi.
My name is Kate Murray. I am a resident. I'm
sorry, Kate, what Murray can you adjust the mic? I
sure can. Thank you.
I'm a resident of south Portland.
I'm also a, a special ed ed tech at Klor.
I had the, I got to meet Ms. Richardson the
other day.
I wanted to
address closing of Kayla, although it, it doesn't necessarily seem
like.
It's it's too worth it, but I, I would like
to take a minute to.
Express
S things . So I'm a special ed tech at
Caler. I work in a functional life skills room, which
if you're not familiar with that,
we service the students with the highest needs and the
lowest.
You know, the, the most limited.
Independence.
Almost all of them are in kindergarten right now.
And most of them did not have any.
Prior schooling experience. Is there a very first time setting?
Foot in a school and.
It's been a hard year. .
On a daily basis, we combat.
Difficult behaviors, regressions that recur after.
Every weekend, every school vacation.
I have been bit, I have been hit. I have
been spit at, I have been urinated on.
And vomited on.
And what's keeping
me going is my team.
And the
relationship that I have had.
That I've been able to form with.
My team and my students.
Students
we have
a a special ed teacher. We have six ed techs
in our room. We have.
Speech.
Physical therapy, occupational therapist.
Ms. Karen, who I don't see anymore.
Has been wonderful. The nurse.
We have a behavioral.
Behavioral consultant.
The gen ed behaviorist.
Who's amazing.
Amazing. And is also
whether or not. I don't know if you're aware of
this, but she's also a safety care trainer.
And she's the one who taught.
Me how to protect myself.
From and to keep myself safe.
And she is
she's one of the people who have been.
Affected by cuts.
Cuts 30 seconds left Kate really crazy.
To me that that is Johnson. I'll be giving my
time to Kate.
So we have this team that we've built.
To trust.
And to provide consistency because it's so important to our
students.
Students transitions are disruptive.
To gen ed students, but they are.
Mm-hmm traumatic.
To special ed students.
Students and we're talking right now. If we look at
option a.
These kids will be
the, the amount of transitions that they're going to have
to make.
I don't see how that they would be able to.
Thrive in any way.
Just constant changes.
Changes having to start brand new.
Every, you know, having to start brand new.
When they have developed their trust.
In us and us with each other.
I'm gonna switch hats because I'm also a resident I
live in the Caler neighborhood actually.
And I see
students from my school.
Walking past my house on their way to school.
All of the time.
And for a lot of them, that's their only means
of transportation.
So the impacts of
our school closing and moving on to another school.
Would be really detrimental to them.
As well
I'm also needless to say I'm a, I'm not needless
to say, but I'm a parent of this. My daughter
goes to the middle school and I am a resident.
I'm a voter in this.
This city. So
it is it
it's upsetting to me.
That there are still so many answers.
That we haven't gotten as to how we got here.
And I know that probably we won't get those.
But I do know that.
My colleagues, these brilliant.
Educators did not cause the mess mm-hmm did not
cause.
This budget deficit.
And they're the ones who have to pay for it.
And
you're gonna vote the way you vote.
But I want you to think about that.
And think that we are not numbers 30 seconds.
We are human beings.
Beings and we have memories.
And as much as I work for this district.
This district, all of you.
Work for me as well.
As a parent and as a voter.
And
these problems will be.
Remembered. Thank you. That's six minutes.
Good evening. My name is Patrick Hess, a resident of south
Portland.
And parent of two district students, one in elementary school
and one at the middle school.
I appreciate the time and commitment you guys are giving
to this challenging.
Issues and decisions. I'm speaking on behalf of myself and
my wife, who is a public school educator with 20
plus years experience currently working in nearby district. She was
here earlier, but had to leave to care for our
children and actually prepare for our the school week ahead
and the school year.
Ahead.
We were both disappointed with the process.
Concerned with the proposals.
Proposals and heartbroken at the likely.
And certain outcomes of what's before us.
I'm gonna read from a letter she sent this board
recently.
So our school district is at a pivotal crossroads one
that will have a lasting impact on the futures of
our children.
Our teachers and our community as a whole, for years
to come.
The budget deficit we are facing is not simply a
school problem. It is a city problem.
To that end. We urge the district leadership board.
Council and city staff to explore every available.
Avenue to minimize cuts to educator staff and put the
district on a path towards improved financial sustainability.
Some ideas include drawing from the city's fund balance.
Revisiting the assessed value of the tank farms.
Farms reviewing the disposition of city owned property.
Identifying savings elsewhere in the city budget.
For example, the city recently put forward an offer of
2.5 million on the former.
Walgreens property for a future police station.
While public safety is clearly.
Critical our community is rightly asking, how can we justify
that expenditure while the city can't fully fund our schools?
And already owns property that may be pseudo for that
use.
Preserving as many staffing positions as possible must be a
priority.
Our educators are the backbone of our schools and they
have the strongest in-school impacts for our students.
Students their loss beyond the immediate harm to students is
extraordinarily difficult and costly to recover from and will likely
have long lasting effects on our district's ability to hire
and retain good educators.
Educators were you configuration as complex works?
Complex work that requires clearly identified goals, robust research.
Transparent communication and genuine collaboration with families, students, and educators,
to attempt it with a reduced and demoralized staff under
the pressure of an immediate budget crisis.
Risks failing our students and further undermining community trust.
There are simply too many unanswered questions at this time.
Family deserve clarity. Teachers deserve stability and our students deserve
a process at centers, their wellbeing, learning, and growth.
We truly believe that artistic can develop a reconfiguration plan.
That is well researched community supported and built to last
with potential future demographic changes in mind.
As a previous speaker noted. We know how to make
informed collaborative plans in south Portland.
Let us not make decisions in haste that we spend
many years trying to fix.
Thank you.
Good evening.
Members of the board teachers.
Teachers school stuff and neighbors.
Neighbors. My name is Alva.
And I am a parent of four children.
Hispanic and bilingual.
In this district, I am here tonight to share my
concerns.
Concerns about the proposed reconfiguration.
Of our elementary schools, the so-called option, a.
Our current pre-K to four model.
Allows her children to grow within a stable.
Familiar community.
In that environment, kindergartners and first graders benefit from seeing.
Older students as role models.
Learning routines.
Routines expectations and social skills by example.
Separating schools.
By age eliminates those natural.
Opportunities.
I am also concerned about sibling separation.
Many families would have children.
Attending different schools at the same time.
Which can increase stress for kids.
And create real logistical challenges for parents.
Especially with drop off pickup and work schedules.
Schedules next school year.
Three of my children will be attending elementary school.
Another concern.
Is that this proposal does not include a clear.
Detail plan.
On how reconfiguration would actually be deployed.
How transitions would be managed.
Managed how families would be supported.
Or how disruption would be mini would be minimized.
For students and staff.
Finally and more important.
I remain unconvinced.
Unconvinced that the social and academic benefits of these change.
At weight, the cost.
Disruption and uncertainty.
It would create
our social, our school staff.
Is already under significant pressure.
Especially after the recent reduction in staffing.
Adding a major structural change on top of that.
Fills unrealistic and
unfair to educators who already.
Stretch thin.
And if the core issue we are trying to address
is reducing the budget.
It is not clear that reconfiguration.
Contributes to solve that problem.
30 seconds left.
I respectfully asked the board to slow down on this
decision.
This decision to change the model.
Doesn't need to be made today.
But it does not to be right.
Thank you. Thank you for listening. Thank.
You
my name is Carol Nishaun. I'm a resident of south
Portland.
And soon to have a child in the district, whether
that'll be the pre-K through the lottery.
Or in kindergarten.
I'm thinking about all of the different school districts, probably
across the country that are having.
Very similar conversations right now. And.
Honestly, it's breaking my heart and I am grieving the
loss.
For my own child and of the children that are
in the district already, and the children are to come
to never get to work.
Possibly with so many of these teachers.
Teachers that I've heard. All of you speak about.
And also the administrators too.
Because it takes strong teachers and.
Strong and magistrate administrators to run a school district.
I keep coming back to.
The mission enriching lives through quality learning for all.
And if this is truly.
The the best budget.
That could be brought forth. And these are the cuts
that had to be made.
I hope every member of city council is watching right
now and thinking about what else.
Can be done.
City council, can you allocate.
More money to the fund balance.
If this is truly where we are.
That my child and all of these children do not
get to experience working with that percussion ed tech.
Working with all of these specialists that create these.
So these important bridges to allow children to have.
Enriched learning.
I also come back to, okay. If equity is a
real goal of this district,
and the decision was made to remove a director position.
That is in charge of diversity, equity and inclusion.
What message does that send?
I am fully supportive of having teachers that are trained
in instruction to make sure.
That the instruction has this lens.
But what message does it send?
If from a staffing position, if your staffing is a
reflection of your goals.
You have removed that position.
This is across the board, not just administration, not just
teachers.
Teachers and positions, what message are we sending?
Are we actually being true to our mission and the
goals we've stated forward. And if this is really all
the money that we have.
City council, please. I hope you are listening.
What more can you put towards this to support?
This city, it is breaking my heart, that we are
all going through such a massive loss.
And can this be eased as we make our way
through this transition?
Do we have to feel all of this pain?
Or can more be put.
Towards our city.
To try three minutes, this gap. Thank you. Thank you.
Lauren.
Lauren Shapiro Deek street.
I wanna acknowledge board member Richardson.
Thank you for your courage and being a voice of
reason.
With deep empathy and a personal understanding of what all
of this means for our community.
Considering you are the only one with children in the
school system.
I'd say you are undeniably closest to this issue.
Undoubtedly closer to anyone else that takes a seat up
there.
I ask all of you to let that really soak
in.
And I encourage you to think long and hard.
About what that looks like to the parents in this
room.
Tonight and watching online.
As for questions.
Questions. What are the cost savings in closing Kahler?
Calor. This is totally unclear at this point.
And makes this makes me wonder if that is by
design.
On the academic outcome chart that was presented.
Could you confirm if Kayla and skill in class sizes
had decreased?
And if small and brown class sizes had increased.
Between 2024 and 2025.
Can you also confirm if the data shows that higher
performance.
Results from smaller class sizes.
Sizes versus lower performance.
From larger class sizes. If that's the case.
That chart paints a very different picture than the agenda
being pushed.
As we are making appointed effort to increase class sizes
with the two proposed.
Options as for the slide regarding achievement gap.
Between bipo students and white students.
Students, what percentage would be English spoken as a second
language?
I imagine that this alone plays a critical role in
outcomes.
The speed at which this process has unfolded.
Raises serious concerns.
Concerns decisions of this magnitude impacting young children.
Families educators and entire neighborhoods.
Neighborhoods require time transparency.
And meaningful engagement.
Moving at this pace has left our community without a
clear understanding of the rationale.
Rationale, unable to fully weigh the trade-offs.
Trade-offs an uncertain about the path forward.
As a result, you have to make a difficult decision
under circumstances that are rushed and incomplete.
Trying to make sense of how we arrived here is
discouraging and it has eroded trust and confidence in both
the process and its outcomes.
Outcomes. It is. Gimme seconds left.
It is deeply troubling that the disruption of our schools
and the entire system is being weighed against a figure
as small as what now seems to be $400,000.
In the context of what is at stake, the amount
is both overstated as a barrier.
And insufficient to justify such a significant.
Impact on our youngest learners.
Learners their families and our educators.
Educators, reducing a decision of this weight to a relatively
modest.
Rebecca Schaffner south Portland resident. I yield my time. Thank
you.
Reducing a decision of this weight to a relatively modest
financial figure, diminishes the lived experiences of our children.
And the stability our schools provide.
I urge you to slow down fully examine implications and
ensure that the path you choose.
Reflects careful deliberation.
And the trust of the community you serve.
A vote to close a school does neither. It is
rushed. It undermines community trust and it disregards the stability
and wellbeing of our children.
As I've said before, the city must take responsibility for
the actions and inaction that have led us here.
They already have the tools at their disposal to address
budget needs.
Yet, what has been lacking is the political will and
diligence to fairly assess commercial and industrial land parcels.
Parcels. That is where our funding gap truly lies.
Furthermore, the city already has the funds to address the
school's urgent needs.
I support pulling from the city's fund balance to cover
this gap.
Rather than forcing families to bear the, the cost.
Unlike the city's recent purchase of Walgreens at cash corner,
which may or may not be repaid through a taxpayer
approved bond.
Are asked, can be replenished.
Responsibly through school leadership.
Pursuing grant funding and seeking emergency relief from state resources.
Resources efforts that to date have not been fully undertaken.
Undertaken, this buys us time to do this right.
Engaging the community planning, thoughtfully and executing with care.
It is the responsible and right. Course of action.
And to end, please listen to the community.
Save our dearly love per percussion. Ed tech. Thank you.
Thank you, Lord.
Good evening.
My name's Alex Mills. I'm reading the words of my wife,
Kathy mills. Who's not able to attend tonight.
Good evening board members. You have a very tough job
in front of you and I do not envy you.
That being said, all the sadness and tears and thoughts
and prayers, the board has shared, could have been avoided.
Because the boundaries of configuration committee already brought the issues
to light.
With specific recommendations.
To the previous school board of which two members are
here tonight.
And they did nothing. Your thoughts and prayers and tears
aren't working here. You had plenty of time to create
solutions and you didn't. This is what happens with a
purely reactive school board.
Your failure of leadership, lack of action. And fear of
the unknown has done nothing but create the chaotic situation.
We're now in.
And more importantly, potentially more inequity for teachers and students
alike.
Reconfiguration will be crucial in creating equity and begin to
repair the damage by pooling resources. So everyone has access
to the same education.
This does not deplete resources, board member Richardson. It does
the exact opposite by creating accessibility to the same resources
across the district at each grade level.
And for those of you new to the board and
who lack the understanding around this topic, I challenge you
to educate yourself.
The website with a record of all the meetings of
this committee and the data is still live.
Again, the boundaries and configuration committee provided insight how this
could work, but evidently the work was not good enough.
Stop bleeding with fear. Kids are resilient.
Resilient adults feelings seem to be the issue here.
Please stop saying things are too rushed and you need
more time because this has been a topic of discussion
for 20 years.
If you're voting for this budget, you clearly made the
decision to eliminate 70 plus positions without knowing how this
will impact the students of south Portland.
No problem there, but the benefits of reconfiguration have clearly
been stated.
Stated as even pointed out by board chair, DeAngelis this
very evening.
And yet you still need more time.
Option a seems to be the best solution for equity
and accessibility for all students.
Students as an aside, this is me.
I had to change schools twice during elementary school here
in south Portland due to district changes. And that's one
of the members said earlier, I forget who it was.
It was barely a blip on the radar.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Alex.
Hi, I am David Fullerton. I'm a resident of south
Portland.
I have a daughter in first grade and another, that
will be in kindergarten in a couple years.
If any of you, any of you are on the
fence with reconfiguration, I ask that you reconsider.
This is my third school board meeting and I've attended
in the past few weeks.
There's been a lot of discussion about loss of trust
with the school board.
And confusion about the process and how we got here.
Begin to restore that trust.
I can understand being forced to make a budget decision.
The numbers are the numbers. Reconfiguration is not a budget
decision.
Right now the fire alarm is going off. The fire
department isn't even here yet. Jared from state farm is
already handing me out insurance paperwork to fill out.
let's put out the fire and figure out next
steps.
I was struck by the point someone made earlier about
first graders having to walk from modulars at small to
use the bathroom.
I hadn't thought about that. What else? Heaven I thought
of, and what's not being considered because we haven't gone
through a thorough analysis.
Pull back the veal and explain how this is going
to work to the citizens of this city.
And how it's going to achieve your objectives with hard
data and bring that and bring the public along with
you during the process.
Pause on reconfiguration and restore trust.
Thank you, David.
Good evening. My name is Charlie Fox. I have a
son who.
Is kindergarten.
Yeah, it I'm going to condolence what everybody else's.
Reconfiguration is way too rush.
Right now, it seems like a lot of people, even
some of our board members up there are very confused
on this whole issue. I say, we need, we need
more time to study it.
We had opportunity to study it back in when we
had options for two years back in 24, 23 and 24.
We chose not to study it for two years, we
would not be here if we studied it for those
two years and we could move this smoothly right through
the process. And we've been.
I'm for it. I want our schools to be more
diverse.
But I'm worried about our kids.
Being disrupted it's too early in forcing to throw wood
out any actual.
Hard concrete evidence, how we're gonna do this.
Everybody says we'll work it through. We got three, four
months. We'll work it through, work it through.
There's no evidence of us actually working through. I want
evidence.
Process procedures, how it's gonna be done properly.
My partner's at home right now with my son.
We're very truthful with our son. We only have one
kid.
We tell 'em everything what's going on in the world.
He pretty much is growing up fast.
My sons don't said to my partner says, Kai says
they should keep things the way they are.
The change is too big and would be hard on
the third graders.
Graders, you know, my son loves.
Loves hanging out where the third graders, he's a kindergartner.
He plays kickball with a third graders. He comes home
and tells me when he beats up on the third
graders at kickball.
And scores goals. It's his favorite thing to do?
I used to be a professional sailing coach.
And for 18 years, I was a professional.
Educator in that world. I remember.
Young youth looking up to the bigger kids.
When we're coaching, sailing and all the stuff I coach
here in Maine and I coach in California for eight
years.
I loved when the youth and little ones looked up
to the bigger ones, they learn a lot from them.
This happens in our school systems at the same time.
My son watches school every day with a third grader.
And other older ones, and it's the most amazing feeling
in the world watching 'em learn and grow from these.
And these third graders are role models to them.
I'm not saying that reconfiguration right now.
And in the future is a bad idea, but right
now it's to rush and we need more evidence going
forward on it. 30 seconds. Lastly.
On the special ed side of it all. I think
we need to keep as many special ed techs as
we possibly can. It is a very crucial role. My
growing up as a child, my neighbor was a special
needs. He taught me so much and life.
Taught me empathy and so much. And I had to
stay in out for 'em. I grew up in the
eighties and nineties in Cumberland.
I had to stand up for him a lot and
be his protector and savior.
But he is my hero and we that's. We need
those special ed techs here today.
Helping him out and keeping him safe. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you.
Board how you guys doing today?
I don't need this microphone for you to hear me,
but you can definitely hear me. . My name is
Emmel Daniels. I have a daughter at Klor elementary school.
One thing I wanted to address first off.
Mr. Faler there's 182 students at Klor elementary, just to
correct that number for you. Cause I know you guys
are looking for a lot of facts. There's 182 students
elementary wise.
So one of the questions I have since you've guys
decided that you're gonna be closing Klor elementary school, it
sounds like it that's the boat and direction it's gonna
be going to.
What timeframe
has been thought of hypothetically.
Brainstormed for letting the parents at element at Cal.
Caler know where their child's gonna go next year.
So that those parents can now walk around those schools.
See what they look like interact with the new teachers
or the potentially the new teachers.
Teachers smell the bathrooms. Look at the lockers.
Lockers check the cafeteria things that most parents are gonna
want to know.
What kind of timeframe you guys have?
And also, is there gonna be an option for parents
to petition if they don't like the decision?
That they've been set with. If you tell me my
daughters go to brown and I don't like brown, can
I send her to Dyer and vice versa?
You guys have a lot to do you guys have
a lot? It's hard.
I know you guys are getting all types of crazy
emails.
Emails it's it's the burden you get, right.
But just be transparent with the parents.
Make that part of what you guys plan to do.
Hey, Taylor parents.
This is where your kids are gonna go. If Ms.
Myra's gonna be tasked to telling us where our par
our students are gonna go. I'd like to be able
to have one or two days for all 82 students.
Students and their parents to see the schools that they're
gonna have to attend.
In about 97 days.
Thank you. Thank you. Ishmail.
Hello, my name is Kim Clark. I am a Kayla
parent.
I am.
Speaking off the cuff. So forgive me if this is
not perfectly thought out.
But I've been listening to a lot of what people
have been saying tonight and listening to some of the
numbers that were given.
In the presentation and
we said, we're looking to cut 8.4 million.
From our budget.
And earlier tonight they said,
that by closing Kayla elementary, we would be saving $378,000.
When you do the math that's 0.04.
Sorry. Point zero four, 7%.
Of that 8.4 million that we are looking to budget are
looking to cut.
At the same time, it's clear to me that the
city council.
Is offering to help. They had a meeting. I'm still
not clear why that meeting was canceled, but it sounds
like there is a willingness for them to help and
to help give us some of that money.
And if we're talking about $378,000, and that is something.
That the city council would be willing to give to
us. And it means that we get to keep Kayla
elementary open.
I don't understand why this isn't an option that we
are looking at.
And I, I further
don't understand that because we are also talking about.
Closing this school and bumping class sizes to 20 to
24 students.
Students per class that's higher than the middle school. That's
higher than the high school. We are talking about elementary
students. These are little kids.
And by putting them in class sizes that large.
You're gonna see differences in behaviors. You're gonna see some
of those things. I know my son has ADHD. I'm
worried about him.
And a class size that that's large right now, he's
in a smaller class size. And I think he's got
an amazing teacher.
Who's giving him all kinds of extra supports.
Supports. And I also know that his teacher is one
of the teachers that's being cut, which makes me incredibly
sad.
And I just feel like all of these decisions are
happening really quickly. They're happening.
Rationally, I know member Richardson. You said that you didn't
like having to make decisions that were rushed, but weird
are deciding to close a school in less than a
month. And that feels like an incredibly rushed decision, especially
considering the, the fact that they're are.
People who are offering to help. And I don't understand
why we're not reaching out to accept that help.
I think that's all I have to say. Thank you.
Thank you, Kim.
Morgan Kerr.
So I appreciate
just this idea of process was brought up or lack
of process.
And I just have a few questions that I want
to ask that has to do with.
This process. So
one of the things that kind of like stood out.
So kind of vividly to me was like, why wasn't
the process to, to close a school?
Giving the same public and transparent roadmap.
That was kind of offered or how we're gonna do
school consolidation here tonight. Mm-hmm.
It seems that if that was gonna be the case,
then there should have been a lot more public outreach.
Like, was there communication with community stakeholders? What did that
look like?
How did people, how was the community shared with this?
The second question with that process was who was on
the team to determine what school is being closed.
Who is responsible for grading the criteria for that, for
that closure.
I think it's really important for that to be transparent
and have that be, be shared with people.
In that
process was the impact on students considered when choosing to
close Kor, getting that the Kor teaching staff was disproportionately
impacted by teacher cuts.
Cuts. The reason why I say this is because if
all the Kor kids need to move.
To new schools. One of the, the biggest indicators of
success is.
Connections. So
if they're going to new schools and all of.
Like large proportion of the teachers that they had been
with.
For years are no longer at those new schools.
What does that do to them?
So my question.
And so actually, so this is my final one.
Is, it's more of a statement. So we're experiencing a
major.
Teacher shortage in our teacher shortage in our state and
country.
Like are we as a community? Okay. With firing such
a large amount of teachers who either like fall within
the thirst three years of teaching the district, whether they
be experienced teachers.
Teachers or completely new to the profession.
It's kind of like this idea that we're like dumping
all our future potential and all our future talent and
teachers just right out the window.
I'm a teacher. I teach in another district.
I know we need young, energetic and creative teachers. We
need teachers who care about the profession.
And it's really hard to see.
What south Portland school district is kind of doing to
the, to our teach to this teaching staff.
30 seconds left. I want my kids.
My own kids, all the kids in south Portland.
To be supported.
And yeah. Thanks.
Thank you.
Hi, Jennifer Christensen. I'm a parent and a taxpayer, and I
did not want to go last. Thank you, because it's
not gonna be that great.
A lot of people have spoken tonight who are much
more eloquent than I am. So I'm not gonna rehash.
What's already been discussed.
But we haven't heard much from old parents like me,
which I cringe to say.
This is my 19th and final year as a parent
of a kid in the south Portland schools.
And, but I'll continue to be a taxpayer. So I
think it's important to keep being here.
This district has talked about redistricting.
Literally the entire time I have had a student in
this district. Somebody said tonight that one of the schools
in Redbank closed, that was the year before my oldest
started kindergarten.
I just feel like we need to stop talking and
start doing. We've had 20 years to collect data, analyze
data, have committees of data, rehash the data table, the
data. Look for new data.
Whatever you guys decide just.
Just decide something and move forward.
Two of my three kids.
Had kindergarten classes of more than 20 students.
Students, my kids went to small one. I.
Don't quote me. I think one of 'em had 23
and one of them had 24, 25.
The only reason that my youngest had a kindergarten class
of 10.
Is because our school
was experiencing so much growth.
That they had to convert a storage closet into a
micro class, which Emily Wright Todd was awesome, but it was
definitely unique. So kindergarten class of 20 to 24.
Used to be the typical norm in this district. And
so I don't think it's completely out of the questions
to go back to that.
I also remember sitting in the small school gym.
With the school board and the superintendent.
In a community setting, the parents had concerns because the
district was gonna place two portable classrooms in on the
school property.
We were told at the time that those were temporary
would only be at small for a few years to
combat the increased enrollment.
My son's 23, as I've mentioned.
Those are still there. And we're talking about bringing them
back to use again, which is.
Kind of insane to me.
Also my oldest changed elementary schools after his first grade
year, he has special needs. He made the transition just
fine because of teacher and staff support in the district.
Whatever happens with this disgraceful budget cycle is completely out
of my control.
But whatever's decided it's go. It's gonna be okay. It
will be okay. The kids will be okay.
Our teachers and staff, the most amazing in the state
are going to see to the they're. Okay.
Even as their positions are cut, their worlds are imploding
and they're trying to figure out how to keep it
together at home.
They will make sure that the kids are okay.
But for God's sake, just keep the related arts and
special education positions intact because you guys are gonna need
every single one as we move forward.
Thank you, Jennifer.
Hi, my name is Kristen McCaffrey. I'm a parent of
two elementary school students, not much of a public speaker.
That's why I'm wavering.
Not cuz of what I'm saying.
As mature as some other families have been doing, we've
been keeping our kids in the loop. We're talking about
this budget over dinner and it's.
It's it's just what we're doing. If we're sharing information
with each other, what does that mean for our kids?
Our families.
Our neighborhoods.
We have a really special neighborhood.
What are the pros or the cons?
What are the alternatives? What can we do?
This is nightly.
We're exhausted from it. Our kids have like, given up
the go to be like, Ugh, God, Gavin.
Again, I know you guys all feel this. I, I
appreciate what you're doing.
You know, my third grader piped up the other night
and he goes, ah,
mom. It's like they got the main idea, but they
ain't got no supporting details. That's what Ms. Johnson, his
literacy teacher would say.
And we laughed and we agreed.
I'm just, I'm just here. I'd like to urge the
board.
To have all the supporting details before making a big
decision, that's gonna impact the entire community of south Portland.
I really appreciate it.
And a question from my husband at home is what
do we know about.
Other communities in Maine that have moved to grade level
configuration.
And what did their timelines look like?
Thank you. Thank you.
If there are no
other people who are going to speak, I'm gonna close.
Public comment.
Thank you. .
There were a number of questions and.
We want to get back to the board.
Because we have these three motions that we need to
take action on, and it's already 10, 10. So.
I'm gonna see if I can find some of the
questions that I wrote down and the superintendent wrote down
some.
And I'll answer. We'll we'll answer what we can here.
One of the first questions was.
On the, was the 8.4 million all in this budget. And
my understanding is everything is in there. And that, that.
Concludes what, what the budget presentation is.
Has all of the reductions in it. Am I correct?
Okay.
If option a is chosen.
How does it affect
summer special ed. I don't know who can answer that.
I, I don't know why it would affect it at
all, but.
But I will let Dr. Prince answer that.
Extended school year services.
Services is provision that we need to provide for students
in special education.
Typically, regardless of the seven schools that children attend.
Those services are provided in a more consolidated format.
In the summer. So a single building closure would not
impede our ability to offer extended school year services. Okay.
I'm gonna have you stand there because I've got a
couple other questions.
If small becomes a pre-K.
pre-K to first grade.
How does that affect the use of the portables? I.
I think I spoke to that, that we do believe
they would need to go back into circulation, whether they
were office spaces.
Small group meeting spaces or instructional spaces is not yet
resolved.
Resolved. Okay. Thank you.
And
there was another question that was around.
The 23% reduction in administrative.
Positions.
But, but the positions were just.
Made into other
so can we speak to the director positions that we're
actually cut?
Sure. So there are
three, fewer director positions in the budget in front of
you.
Two of those.
Positions, there is a proposal for an additional.
Teacher facing role, however,
we respect that if those positions do move to the
teacher association,
that those would be filled via article 19, or excuse
me, article 18 of the teacher contract.
Therefore it is not those two individuals moving with their
positions.
Positions. So there are
there are three fewer.
Positions. Okay.
Let me see, there were a couple.
Questions that I might be able to answer.
One question was about
that the school board is a small group making the
decision.
And that's correct. We are a representative government and.
So this past November, I just would like to point
out.
That we had four open seats and there was no
opposition.
So it, it is an.
Eventually it becomes the board's decision.
And so just tonight, for example, we had two hours
of public comment.
We've done that multiple times.
People on the board have spoken to people who come
to meetings, people who don't come to meetings.
Meetings and
trying trying to take in all.
What all that there is to consider, but eventually it
is the seven people, just like the seven people on
the city council.
Who passed the city budget, which brings me to the
next question, which was.
Can the budget.
Vote be a referendum. It is a referendum.
And when you vote on the budget.
It's mandated by state statute.
That we must put the budget on by June 9th.
If we do not put a budget on by June 9th.
Then we have to resort to the former budget, which
is two and a half million dollars.
Less
and would likely then need to in that interim period,
at least
likely reduce.
Reduce more because we, the, the budget.
With the 6%
increase, even though we're cutting.
Reducing the budget by 8.4 million. We're actually increasing the budget
by two and a half million dollars.
So
the money that was spent for the purchase of the
police department.
I mean a again,
it's important for people to understand that there's just one
pool of money. It's all taxpayers money.
So the money that was used to purchase the land
where Walgreens is, was not.
From taxpayers, it was from, and I, the word is
escaping me and I was trying to find it while
we were asset forfeiture. Thank you very much.
That's why I have Adrian next to me.
Asset forfeiture was how that land was purchased.
And that is only the land.
So, I don't know if any of you have ever
been in the police department, but the police department in
the fire department are in devastating condition and do need.
To have repair. So
or replacement, and that would have to also go out
to a bond.
To the public to approve that.
So one of the other questions was.
That the, the question was.
It seems that the city council is willing to help.
And why aren't we taking that? The city council is
not offering to give us any money.
The city council doesn't have money to give us.
There's potential that we could borrow money from the city.
From their fund reserve.
But they have an obligation to keep a certain amount
of money in their fund reserve as well.
They're not gifting anything. They're not offering to gift anything.
So this board has the authority to go back to
the council.
And ask for an increase in.
The guidance that goes out in the referendum vote in
June.
To ask for a higher percentage of money from taxpayers.
Taxpayers that that's. So we have two ways that we
can get money.
We either ask for more money from taxpayers or we
borrow money from the city, but there's there's no, there's
no gift out there.
So I just wanna be clear about that.
There was a question Dr. Prince about, and I think
you spoke about this tonight.
But if this board votes.
Votes one way or the other for reconfiguration or.
Or continue K to four.
For how will that plan take place?
I think you addressed that already, but I'll give you
a chance to say it again. I.
I, I think we've gone through that in the.
Slides that are in front of the board this evening.
So if, if there's a more specific question, I'm happy
to address it, but I don't have anything further to
add. That's.
Someone did speak about the makeup of the.
Of the
school board and.
There's nothing in the charter.
That constitutes, who gets to be on the board other
than you're being a resident of the city. And.
Living in the district for which you run.
But so, you know, we have representation.
Of seniors of renters.
We don't have representation, representation of bipo.
You know, we have people with disabilities. We have like,
there's, there's a whole plethora of people.
Who we are obligated to represent, you know, we're not
just representing.
Students or parents we're representing.
All the people who
live and
live and vote in this city.
And any, and we even represent people who are not
non-citizens, who are not able to vote. We still have
an obligation to.
Represent them and their interests.
Interests. So we're obligated to represent them all.
And, and, and you elect us to do that. And.
And you have the opportunity to elect.
Elect anybody you want.
So
I just said that would be a loan. I don't
know what else you had superintendent. I didn't have any
other.
I'm just wanting to be sure the ones I had.
Yeah.
Oh, there was a question about.
Who was on the team for the closure.
For the recommended closure, I'll let Dr. Prince speak to that.
But sure we've addressed, addressed that in prior meetings.
Meetings, there are a number of teams that were involved.
Most notably the budget council, which is directors and school
administrators.
And our entire elementary school administrator team as well. Thank
you.
There was another question about was the impact of students
considered and.
Yes. It most certainly was. And I think that's why
this board is in.
Is that was someone who said there are a number
of board members who are.
Confused. I, I think there was one board member who
said.
That that, that, that person was confused. I don't, I
don't feel any confusion, but I, I don't necessarily represent
what everybody in this room wants.
But I'm not confused about where.
I where I sit
oh,
and Ishmail Daniels asked a couple questions.
About
the timeframe that was.
Left to, to what was the timeframe that's planning to
be used?
It to let parents of students know if Kayla is
the school that's closed.
How that's going to, how that process is gonna go
forth.
Sure we understand that there's a special obligation to the
families of whichever school. If the board does move forward
with closure, that there's a special obligation to our communications.
There.
And again, because that is.
Directly tied to whatever comes next with the planning.
That will be
that will dictate a little bit how soon we would
be able to notify which school.
The family would end up at, but the hope would
be able to communicate as soon as possible.
We, we recognize the disruption that those families will face.
Thank you. And the other question he had is would
there be a right to petition to go to a
different school?
We currently have our process.
In district for what's called an intra district waiver.
If a family is districted to attend. If their child
to attend one school in the district.
And for whatever reason.
That is not an appropriate.
Choice for their family. They have the ability.
To submit a request for an inter-district waiver.
Those are reviewed by myself and the elementary school principals.
Principals for the considerations.
So I would imagine that that would still.
That process would still exist.
However, when that happens.
Just an important note that transportation is not provided.
Provided when we grant a waiver of that nature.
If a child is placed through the special education process.
At a special purpose.
Classroom or a self-contained classroom.
Then there are considerations and the district does provide transportation
in those instances.
When it is through that I E P team process.
Thank you. Thank you. Very professional circumstances. And I don't
mean to speak out. I'm gonna have to, I don't
mean to speak out well, you, you can, I'm gonna
speak out. Ishmail ISEL ISEL I, I need to stop
you. I need to stop you. I'm sorry. Special circumstance.
If you send my daughter to another school, I want
to know where she's.
She's going in advance. So I can go into that
school and see the teachers, the principal, the health, the,
the, I want to know all the staff the same
way we know all the staff, Kayla elementary. So that
was my question. Okay. Those are, I, I appreciate that
circumstance. I understand that these parents wouldn't have the options.
This is not a.
Normal circumstance. You're closing a school.
I want to know just like multiple parents want to
know.
Can I go into that school? Can I see the
teachers? Can I go and see what the classrooms look
like and the condition of those, of the condition of
that classroom?
I'm not asking, cause this is a normal school year.
I, I understand Ismail. Thank you.
Let me see if I can just answer.
An overview.
That all of this is going to be dependent upon
what this board does right now.
So the first thing is about school closure. The second
thing is about.
Reconfiguration versus K to four. So that's going to drive.
The next phase of what happens.
So let's well, how can you vote if you don't?
Well, I, I, I need to ask the audience, public
audiences closed.
So I can't take questions. And from the audience, we're
back to, to the answer. We're, we're back to the
board.
And we'll we'll we can answer questions after we take
a vote.
So we are at the first motion. I just think
there's some follow up to that answer that Joe gave.
So I'd just like to make a vote. Go ahead.
Quick comment about that, which is that.
There will be assuming there's reconfiguration, as we've seen tonight,
there will be.
There will be.
I forget what it's called, but, you know,
people be brought together at each school. Yes. And, and,
and, and input will be sought. And part of that
input could be, and this speaks directly to the question
that was raised.
Raised could be, how are we gonna work this out
so that we get to know what's happening and hot
water are our options gonna be? So although there is
a process that's currently in place that doesn't mean something
else can't evolve and shouldn't evolve. And it wa it
may, may well, but that's part of what happens when
you bring the community together to, as this process evolves.
So I just wanna say.
I think that could easily be part of it. Very
important. Thank you, member Holman. And, and I would concur
with that, that there's.
There's that one that, that some of this is linear.
As we make a decision.
And then what's the plan and what's the best way.
And as member Homan just said, you know, we might
have an idea in place.
But there might be other, other things that we can
learn from that we can improve that.
And to go to Mr. Daniel's question.
You know, there's certainly will be an opportunity.
For people to know the schools and know the situation,
but we, we don't even know yet which direction we're
going. So we can't even.
Say where students are gonna go to school. We need
to first.
Take that action. So we are at the first, I
have a procedural question too. Just I was procedural question.
So.
So when will the board members get another chance to
make a comment?
When we get the motion on the floor.
All right. Thank you. Okay. So the first, the first
motion is.
Review the letter to commissioner.
Of education template consideration.
Of closing of an elementary school and authorization for the
superintendent to file a school closing.
Report with the commissioner of education.
If I can have a motion, if I can have
that motion on the, on the floor, you need tell
the question. You didn't answer all the questions that were
asked. I, I, I, I, I did. I, I answered
all the questions I had written down. Okay guys, we,
we it's 10 20.
So we're gonna get to these votes and if there
are more questions.
Questions. If we didn't answer all your questions, those are
the, all the questions I have written down. All the
questions that the superintendent has doesn't mean. We got them
all. We're we're not perfect.
But then mine's critical, but what what's the cons posing
inhaler? What did we say? That is a very critical
question that that's been presented, but I'll let Dr. Prince
is not okay, Lauren.
If you, if you can just be patient and just
be kind.
We're we're we're it's it's 10 20 and we're, we're
really doing the best we can.
So I'm gonna put that question back to Dr. Prince.
And see if she can answer it quickly, quickly.
Just quickly.
That figure that people keep referencing right around 400,000.
Are some of the facility savings that we anticipate by
taking that building offline.
The reconfiguration is provi of the elementary school, or excuse
me.
The closure of an elementary school.
Which means more efficient use of our space in the
other four, whatever model of reconfiguration or full band.
Allows us to have more efficient use of staffing. And
so it represents.
The, the reduction of the teaching positions that allow for
greater savings. So the whole proposal altogether.
For the elementary portion.
Is far greater than that 400,000. And again, the 8.4 million
is accounted for in the proposal.
Thank you. You still have a, number's not an answer.
Yeah.
I'm gonna go to the review of the letter, to
the commissioner of education, consideration of closing of an elementary
school.
An authorization for the superintendent to file a school closing
report.
With the commissioner of education. If I can have someone
put that motion on the table.
Anybody move by member Smith.
And seconded.
By member Dowling.
Member Smith. Do you wanna speak to that?
Yeah, I, well, I, I first want to recognize that
many of the questions that were asked during public comment
were not answered. And my hope through this process going
forward is that we can have, I wrote down as
much as I can. No, I told, understand the, that
we just need to have a better process for veteran
those down.
So I, I just, just speaking to the closing of
an elementary school and this question of cost, I just
want to point out the.
The, the driving force of this decision is about.
Compounding costs over the next period of years.
And some of the earliest slides.
From some of the earlier meetings they have.
Costs projections of savings over a period of five, 10
years. You can go back and look at those they're
all in this, on the city website.
But this decision is not, it's not about just savings
this year. It's about putting our district back on track
so that we're not at this position to three years
from now and having these same arguments and same discussions.
So.
A big part of my.
Decision making here is the idea that.
We need to move forward in a way that allows
clarity for our administration.
And for our parents and for teachers so that we
have a path forward.
And that's, that's what this is about.
And so I just want to just put that out
there before we vote.
Appreciate that member Smith member, darling.
Nothing to add any other comments member.
Feller, just a quick confirm the enrollment in the most
recent enrollment number from, from Caler please.
The correct enrollment is 160.
Four students, the students who attend Chicky preschool and off-campus
program.
Are sometimes reported in Kor's figures. They're not physically located
inside that building though.
Thank you.
Any other comments?
Comments can, can I just say one thing?
Please. Yeah. Okay.
I, I mean, in my opinion, the only other option.
Of not closing a school is presenting two budgets to
city council.
One doesn't close a school.
And shows
a higher tax increase.
That to Tyler's point doesn't necessarily put us in the
best position.
For future years.
But it does keep us, you know,
kind of continue the conversation.
With another group of elected officials.
That's the only option I see.
I, I guess I have a question of, even if
we vote.
Tonight, can we still, and, and knowing I'm not voting
for the budget tonight? I don't think we have a
majority in favor voting for the full budget tonight based
on what I was.
Picking up earlier on comments, but.
Do we have the ability to just.
I don't know. Talk about that. What that would look
like. I know Joe's probably gonna lose her mind.
if I ask her to create another budget, but.
I, I mean, that's the only way I see is
that.
And, and then I think we have a, and then
we run the risk of a budget that potentially fails
because we've presented.
A budget to taxpayers. That's higher.
I'm in favor of asking for a tax increase so
we can build back a fund balance because.
When something bad happens, we have no money. .
And that is very concerning.
For a budget of this size.
We have a motion. So that's, that's my.
That's that's, that's all I'm offering to the feedback we're
hearing. Thank you. We have a, so I just wanna
say that I don't think we have a choice. I
think we really do have to close a school. I
think that we, the, the puppy population number aren't in
our favor.
And it's, it's really sad.
For a lot of people it's highly disruptive as it's
been said, but I, I really don't think we have
a choice and it's a very unpleasant choice.
But
, you know, there used to be a lot more
kids. There used to be a lot, lot more kids.
And there aren't.
Thank you.
We have a motion on the floor.
And the letter to the commissioner is pursuant to main
revised statutes, title 20, a sections 400 hundred two and
41 0 3.
The Southport school board finds that the Kahler school is
unnecessary or unprofitable to maintain.
And authorizes the superintendent to file with the commissioner of
education, a school closing report with respect to the Taylor
school.
That closing to be effective. And I don't have a
date for that.
It would be the, the, the end of.
20 25, 26 school year. Okay.
So to be effective.
End of
25 26 school year.
By way of
further explanation and guidance to the superintendent with respect to
the filing.
Of the required school closing report, the board contemplates. And
what would be inserted would be a brief explanation of
how students will be shifted to and where.
An explanation for what will occur upon the closure of
one elementary school, the Calor school would remain under the
control.
Of the Southport school department and the department would explore
the possibility of leasing the space with the proceeds being
utilized as permitted by state statute.
Can I ask, excuse me, can I ask a question
about this language?
Yes.
I mean, so we don't know some of the answers
to this in terms of like where students are gonna
go. So is it is like a degree of specificity
required or is it simply just, they will be provided
with another school to go to so.
It's what's required is just a brief explanation.
Of how students will be shifted into where, and we
can, we know that they will stay within.
The remaining elementary school. Okay. So that's an adequate enough
description.
Okay.
Any further discussion.
Okay. All those in favor.
Of the motion.
I have Holman Dowling Smith.
Feller.
Richardson. I can't see. And rich.
And all those opposed.
And that's Dean.
Okay. So my God
we've passed the first motion.
The second motion is
second motion is consideration and action.
For the board to select one of the two options
below for the elementary school grade configurations.
To be effective with the beginning of the 26 27 school
year.
That's option a and option B.
We need to put the motion on the floor. Everybody
only gets to vote for one or the other.
So that we can get a tally of those votes.
So if somebody you're putting the motion on the floor,
motion on the floor, put.
Move by feller and seconded.
By sure. Rich.
Feller board member feller. Yeah, let's start by saying, you
know, I, I see tremendous opportunity.
In reconfiguration. I think the benefits have been clearly articulated
to me by many teachers and administrators in the district.
I was struck by hearing that there's educators who have
come to our district because they were so excited about
the idea of reconfiguration feel so strongly about it.
I would vote positively in favor of reconfiguration this year.
I just am not gonna vote for it when it's
a cons. It's it's not a concept.
But, you know,
our reconfiguration plan should be pages and pages long at
this point. Mm-hmm that I could vote for. So
if reconfiguration passes tonight, I'm gonna do as much as
I can.
To get the community excited about this and lead.
Sessions at the schools and in the community hearing what
people want, like a, a I'm really.
I'm excited about that prospect, but I'm, I'm not gonna
set the precedent of voting for something where we don't
have an extremely detailed plan.
And member rich.
Ish. I have no comment. Anyone else member Holman? Yes.
I'd like to comment on this.
I, I, I intend to.
Try and vote for
reconfiguration. And I wanna say I've heard terms like not
transparent and rushed.
I would rather use terms like stressful and intense.
Or concerted in effortful.
Or courageous and hardworking. And I really feel that, you
know, we've been, we've been treating, we've been treating the
people who've brought, brought this forward to us.
Like they're, they haven't done their job and they're, they're
not being careful. And I, I know, I just wanna
say, I wanna say for our, our assistant superintendent, Joe Prince,
I think, feel, think she's an incredibly, incredibly hardworking person
and is taken a law of, it's a very, very,
very tough job. And it is the job.
But, you know, I don't, I don't feel that there's
no, one's trying to hide stuff.
I really don't think that's true. I just don't believe
that. And you know, if it turns out that it
is, I'll be, you know,
I'll I'll, I'll eat whatever I have to do to,
to take it back. But.
I, I don't feel confused or rushed. And I think
it's been 20 years in the making as was said,
I appreciated that comment.
And it's painful. It's painful to make changes. People don't
like it.
I, you know, you can make the road by walking
when you have good leadership. And I feel that, I
feel that we do. I think, I think that I
think it's a positive direction. I think it's something we've
needed to do for a long time. I thought that
that before I, you know, and I, I still think
it and I hope we're.
Able to do that. And I think it, I think
we can succeed. And as someone else said, well, I
think Daniel's implying that, that, you know, we have, we
have great resources here among the families among the community
and among the people who are, who are part of
the school district. And I think we mobile the, that,
and we make the best of it. And I think
in.
The long run. We'll be glad that we did.
Thank you.
Other members, Dowling member Dowling, ju just for clarity.
Is the motion that board member feller made. Is that
for option a or option B it's it's for both.
And everybody's gonna get to vote one or the other.
Yep. Like when I called the vote, you're gonna vote
for either. I'm gonna start with option, option a.
And see how many people and.
Then option B. So, okay. Must we vote for one?
Correct? We must vote for one. Yes. Okay. You're sitting
here. You gotta vote. You gotta step up. Yeah, you
can't.
Can't you can't just abstain you can't just OB bail.
Yeah.
So is it
the only thing I would say is I wanted to.
Concur with what member Holman just said.
I, I don't feel rushed. I, I know this is
a change. I know this is difficult.
I know this has challenges around it, but I feel
like, and, and I feel like I've come 180 degrees
because I didn't start.
In favor of this.
That's and I certainly wasn't in favor of it two
years ago when the boundaries and configurations committee made recommendations
to this board.
But I've come to believe that I think this is
what's in the best interest of students.
Students and
I, I also think.
That the concept of shared sacrifice is really important that
I think.
Just asking Kayla to be the only school that gets
upended and.
All the kids moved about and all the staff moved
about.
Is not a way to bring our community.
Back together, but to all look at this.
And as member feller just said,
even though he's not ready to vote in favor of
reconfiguration. He's willing to work and help make this be
successful. So.
Yeah.
So I, I need to, I'd like to say one
thing. Oh, I'm sorry please. Yeah.
So
I think it'll I'm.
I'm I've already explained I can't support option a, I
think it's.
It's a very scary
agenda we have in front of us as a district.
It's not because I don't.
Don't trust the people.
That are telling me, they think they can do it,
but it's because.
I don't really know. I don't really know why we
felt that this is the, the year to solve for
everything. It's not a delay tactic.
We have a community that's really open to reconfiguration. We've
started the dialogue. There's a way to do this the
right way.
I, I don't, I don't like that. People feel like
they're being told what to do. And yes, I don't
think it's fair that we have one school that we
have to close and that population.
Has to, you know, feel that pain.
But I don't think that's the reason that we then
disrupt the entire elementary school, just because.
We, you know, that, that that's not a logical rational
decision.
This is a financial
conversation. We need to be having.
And
I really hope that we're on the right side of
this. I really do like I'm with Daniel.
Like, I'm not gonna, I'm gonna, I'm gonna support our
budget. I'm gonna support the initiatives. I'm gonna be at
every single one of those community engagement.
Because I wanna know what's going on and I wanna
know where my kids are going to school. Right.
So we all want that. And.
And I hope that we can do this.
In an inclusive way. There's been a lot of divisive.
Energy from this board and interacting with the public. When
you are sharing your views.
Views that were contrary to other views up here and.
And I don't think that was the right way to
start this conversation. Perhaps things that could have gone better.
Had we had a more collaborative tone from the beginning.
So
I can only be optimistic cuz I have no choice
and we have no choice as parents. We have to,
we have to role model for our kids that this
is gonna be an okay transition.
And I know kids are resilient and I'm really tired
of hearing that. .
Because we had a choice here.
And we're choosing a really hard choice.
So
I really hope it works out. I do. Thank you.
Anybody else. Okay. I need to have a show of
hands for all those in favor of option a.
So I have a Holman.
D Dowling.
Smith and rich.
And those in favor of O option B.
Feller and Richardson.
So in that vote option a passes.
Passes for primary.
And intermediate model reconfiguration.
The
third motion is consideration and action.
To adopt the FY 27 superintendent's budget.
As the board's budget proposal for city council.
And do I have a motion to put that on
the floor?
Moved by feller and seconded.
Seconded by Smith.
Feller board member feller. Yeah. I mean just a really
tough budget, losing a lot of really talented educators.
Educators. Super sad.
I'm prepared to support this budget. If the EdTech position
is put back in.
Professional tech. That's all officer. Thanks.
But it's not in this budget. It's not in this
budget, so I'm not gonna support this budget. That's okay.
A any other co member Smith? Yeah, I think my,
my driving force for supporting this budget is moving our
community forward.
Towards a planning process. I totally respect the rest of
the board's.
Board's idea about talking to city council and I'm definitely
open to it.
Currently I support the budget as is and, and would
ask the city council for.
Support with our fund balance. But if there are other
ideas out there, you know, I understand how.
How folks feel and I'm, I'm definitely open to it.
Member rich.
I'm gonna support the budget.
And I think we really need to still consider talking
to the city council, if there's any options to backfill
our support.
We're already $500,000 behind as I understand it in next
year's budget.
We need some cover.
So I'm gonna support this budget, but understand.
You know that we have to be an excellent.
Excellent, you know, school district and expect process to be
improved next year. I like that earlier November sort of
number. If we get the budget out earlier, I think
we really missed the boat on that. If we could
have had these numbers, like in February, but those are
just my criticisms. So.
It's okay. Member Holman.
I, I I'd like us to have a chance to
talk with the city council.
And, but I'm, but I, and, and I, I hate
the pain in this budget. I it's, I, but I,
but I do, I will say, I do feel this
year's process has gone better than last year's. That is
cold comfort. Okay. Cuz you know, you could hardly not
do worse than last year, but.
But, but this is, this is, is, is painful, has
been painful.
And I'm sorry about that. I wish it were different
than it is. And.
But anyway, I, I hope we can talk to city
council.
I do think having as member rich just said, we
need, we need some kind of cushion.
Because if we keep going forward like this and you
know, there's a, I, I, I.
It's been, I feel sorry. Also, you know, if, if
I, if I'm guilty for having.
Helped to bring this to us, us to this bad
place by voting for prior budgets.
Budgets, you know,
I, I, you know, I look, I look now and
thought, wow, what were we thinking? It seemed like a
good idea at the time, but apparently we weren't. We,
we shouldn't have, we shouldn't have voted for that, but
those budgets we did.
You know, we can't re you can't the, the pass
is not optional, optional to change, but I, I wish
I wish I.
I, and I wish I'd seen things differently and I
didn't.
Didn't and here we are, but I, so I I'm
gonna hold off on supporting this budget till we get
to talk to city council.
But I don't think it's. I like, I just, I
don't think it's something that's been crafted without thought. I
think it's been actually crafted thoughtfully.
But still
can I say something please? Yeah. I, I agree with
Claire.
And it's 11 o'clock at night. This is a very
serious decision.
I'm not, I don't feel good making it right now.
I mean, we, we just got the full budget today.
I don't know how we can be okay with
it as an on its face, but.
So I'm not voting in support of the budget.
I'd like to talk to city council as soon as
possible, or have that conversation.
And thank you for being open to that.
Thank you. Other people.
I just so
maybe a, a, a piece of clarification and, and folks
on the board can disagree with me if, if you
feel so moved, but.
We are a lot of us do feel like we
want to talk to the city council.
About, you know, a higher guidance.
On the threshold, but it seems like.
It's not the budget that will be impacted rather. It's.
It's generating more tax revenue.
To seed our fund balance.
So I just kind of want to make that point
clear that it doesn't seem like any of us are
advocating for the budget to change. When we're talking to
city council.
It's just that we need to put money in the
fund balance and please disagree with me. If, if you
feel differently,
I I'm not sure. It's 11 o'clock at night. I
can't, I don't know. I don't. I mean, .
I, I feel like we just, we, we, we have,
who knows anything in we're talking about. Yeah, I know
we have moved. We, we just made.
Really hard decisions. We've been talking about the elementary schools
for weeks. That's all we've been talking about. I think
that the school budget deserves another.
Opportunity to discuss. Yeah. Like I.
I mean, we just cut 70 plus positions and we're
just gonna rubber stamp the budget. Like, come on.
So, did you wanna say something? I was just gonna
say, I agree with what board member Richardson just said.
I can't support this budget. I said earlier.
Based on some of the proposal.
Proposed changes that were made just tonight.
Changing the D E I from.
From, I thought it was going to be from a
director to coordinator.
And, and proposing it from a director to a strategist.
Without any other cost savings makes no sense to me.
I, I have questions about a couple other special ed
positions in the budget as well.
And, and as member Richardson said, it's 11 o'clock at
night. And I feel like this is a big deal.
And.
So I'm not prepared to support this budget at this
time. However, we, however we go forward, I just feel
like we need to have.
More conversation and more.
Discussion about it. So there will be a meeting right
here again, Thursday night.
And so I'm going to take all those in favor.
Of the budget.
It I've got Smith and rich.
Is that it. Okay. And those opposed.
Holman.
Feller Richardson Dean and
Dali. So that motion fails.
Fails and
I will.
Close our discussion. Is there anybody?
Who wants to come forth to speak in public comment
the second time, I'm not gonna read the rules again.
If there's nobody who's going to speak.
Okay.
Nobody is going to speak. Nope, we got water we
one. Okay. Two looks like there's one person wants to
speak. Yeah, I'm waiting. I'm waiting. .
Sorry, not to make people stay longer. Brit Begley, south
Portland.
Sun in first grade daughter going into pre-K who knows
where for both of them. The only thing I wanted
to say is I did a lot of research around
timelines. I work in operations, in revenue modeling for businesses
in the multi hundred millions of dollar.
And when you look at the timeline.
There, I can't find a single.
Community that has done reconfiguration from decision to implementation in
under 12 months.
So being the first one in the scenario, doesn't sound
like a, a reasonable way to go about it.
I'm all for reconfiguration, if it's the right idea. And
if it's right for our community,
but I just, I can't support being the first.
Community to do this in a fourth of the timeline.
And when you look at the.
Correlation between successful outcomes, which means they didn't actually reverse
it four to six years later.
It was based on community being on board at the
time of decision to implementation.
That's all I wanted to bring to this. Thank you,
Brett.
Ishmael.
I guess my only question is you said they're gonna
have another meeting on Thursday. Is that a city council
meeting or a school board meeting?
No, that that will be a school board meeting on
Thursday, this Thursday at 6:00 PM. This Thursday at 6:00 PM right
here, right here. Okay. So we're not gonna do Monday.
We'll do Thursday.
Well, yeah, we're, we're going, we'll do Thursday, Thursday. So
we're, who knows because we haven't passed a budget, so
we still have to meet with the city council on
the seventh. And.
So we need to have a meeting on Thursday.
So that we can move to the next step, whatever
that is, Ishmael. Okay. So you're gonna, then I'm just
asking for clarification. Yeah. We'll continue this meeting this Thursday,
correct? Three days from today. Correct. And then on the
seventh, you guys are going back to speak with city
council. That's correct. Thanks so much. You're welcome.
Again, Patrick Hess, south Portland resident, parent of two children in
the schools. I just wanted to clarify a point about.
Reconfiguration being a topic of discussion for close to 20
years.
It doesn't mean we've gotten the data. It doesn't mean
we've gotten the.
Priorities straight. It doesn't mean we have a plan for
how it's going to be executed. I'm really now concerned
about the burden we're placing on our teachers. Many of
whom are saying goodbye to close colleagues of years.
Who now have the work of 12 plus.
36 plus month planning to do in the course of.
A few short months that is likely gonna stretch over
the summer, which is likely gonna cost the district.
More because we're gonna have to reimburse 'em for that
time.
I appreciate that. The discussion around.
School district boundaries has been an on again, off again,
discussion for.
Many years here in south Portland, but I have yet
to see in my nine years of living here, that
we've taken the question as seriously as it deserves to
be taken. And I, I do feel that this has
been rushed. I appreciate member Holman that you don't think
that this was fast or that it was confusing. But
I think as a member of the public sitting in
the audience without any numbers up on the screen,
to clarify what budgets we're even talking about at this
point.
There was some process issues here that could be significantly
improved upon in the future.
Thank you, Patrick.
Hi, I'm really bad at public speaking. So if I
cry, it's just cuz I'm sound good. So not good
if I, by introducing yourself, please. My name's Amelia John.
I am a spa ed ed tech.
At Klor elementary.
This was my first year. Thankfully my position has not
been cut.
But I just started in November.
I'm also a parent.
Of one child who is at brown.
And another who will be starting pre-K next year.
I wanted to share this note. This was the first
teacher appreciation note that I've received. And it was really,
really.
It was really special to all of us.
So dear Taylor family.
I want to start by saying, I think it's every
parent's worst fear.
To think about their child being mistreated.
When you add a nonverbal.
Child to this equation, that fear is even greater.
There are no amounts of Christmas or teacher appreciation gifts.
Gifts, really not enough words to express how grateful I
am to each and every one of you.
Who pour into my boy each day, who quiet that
fear.
And without even knowing it reassure me each day.
That I question if sending him to school is the
right call.
Working in early childhood education myself.
I know that this field is truly a labor of
love.
And to thank each of you with words, we'll never
feel like enough.
Please know, I appreciate you all.
And I am so thankful to have you guys on
our team.
It's clear each day through his excitement to go to
school that he loves and feels comfortable with you all.
This is a family that.
Walks they live across the street.
Her mom, mom has her hands full and.
She's one of the families that's gonna be heavily.
Impacted by this choice. Hmm.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Is there anyone else?
Okay. Seeing none.
Public comment is closed. I think there is one.
No done.
Christine. Did you wanna speak?
Did you, were you coming up? Yeah, I did have
one thing to say. Yeah, go ahead.
And, and actually I just hit send when you hit,
hit the .
That's okay. And I just find that extremely.
Inappropriate, in my opinion, it feels extremely inappropriate.
Can you come up to the podium?
And introduce yourself. Hi. Hi there. It's Christine Dobson.
South Portland teacher and resident, I find it really inappropriate
that member feller is refusing to vote for the budget.
If one and only one out of all the people
that have been, let go and.
During this procedure here.
Is not reinstated.
There are so many educators and staff members that have.
Been here.
Every night have they have been advocated for, they have
advocated for themselves powerfully and passionately.
And yet member feller, you said I will not pass
the budget.
So you would've passed, said yes. A yes. Vote.
But only that one position.
And all those other people. Oh, that would've been fine
with you. It just seems very inappropriate.
And I felt like you needed to hear that from
me.
And, and thank you, Christie.
Yes.
Charlie Fox.
Son named kindergarten.
So I'm pretty disappointed right now.
At some of the board members up here, some I
actually met in person.
And told me that they were not gonna be voting
for reconfiguration.
Feeling I got stabbed in the back. A lot of
us in our community got stabbed in the back for
it also.
Understanding that there's only one board member up here with
a child.
Who's looking at this.
All you don't have children up here.
You don't, you don't have children in elementary school right
now.
So with that said, you don't know how this is
gonna affect them. You as an adult, which adults for
many years,
consistently keep making decisions for children.
And don't understand the effect that zumab on the children.
All of us in a room, want reconfiguration. We are
all about it.
But we want to be done professionally. We want resource
done. We want to be done the correct.
Way we don't wanna be rushed into this.
Understand, all of you up here who voted for this
tonight?
If this fails, this is on you.
On the boards and on you, if this fails.
Fails. All right. You're putting our children.
And teachers and a lot of people in the school
system at risk of this failing.
This is not professional. This is not how it's supposed
to be done.
We need research. We had time for two years to
do research. It did not happen.
And now you're trying to force something through.
Very quickly.
A lot of people spoke tonight and said that is
too quick.
We've been saying this for four over four, four meetings.
I've been to every single one.
Every single person says it's too fast.
We want it, but do the research.
That's all we're asking for.
It's like, can you listen to us?
Thank you, bill.
Bill Newton, skilling, parent.
To the new board members.
I am wondering why you would follow the leadership of
Le.
Of board members and district staff that got us into
this situation.
Thank you. Thank you.
Any other comments?
Comments seeing none.
Public comment is closed.
We're just up to board communications. Does anybody have any
announcements or anything?
That they'd like to share at this point.
Daniel. Yeah, just briefly. I talked to the city about
taking responsibility for snow plowing our schools.
They're even contracting out to plow fairy village. So.
At this time they don't have the equipment or the
manpower to plow our schools. Unfortunately.
That's it. Thank you.
And without further objection, this meeting is adjourned.